THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 




CHAPTER 



1 



INTRODUCTORY 

/^IUR generation has witnessed the final collapse 
C/ of the economic Liberalism which prevailed 
in the nineteenth century; and with our genera- 
tion and the next lies the task of reconstructing 
Europe. Internationally, the period of unrestricted 
private enterprise and competition has ended In 
deadlock and confusion. And in all countries 
capitalism has left as its legacy a class of property- 
less and irresponsible workers, destined, despite 
an overproduction resulting from unique techni- 
cal achievement, to lead sub-human existences in 
conditions of poverty and squalor. 

The age of laissez-faire, laissez-passer> has of 
necessity given place to an age of planned econ- 
omy; and parallel to the collapse of economic 
Liberalism has been the failure of political Lib- 
eralism. In their place the new totalitarian 
ideologies are emerging. There is the Marxist 
totalitarianism, which would eliminate from so- 
ciety all classes save the workers and from life all 
spiritual values, and would Itself provide the be-all 

9 



10 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

and the end-all of human existence; and there is 
the totalitarianism of the new nationalisms, which 
would discipline the individual to an almost mys- 
tical conception of the State. 

The conflict of ideologies to-day presents the 
gravest threat to the peace of the world; but there 
is one man in Europe who, more than any other, 
has shown that totalitarianism is not the only 
alternative to undisciplined individualism, class 
exploitation, and the rule of plutocracy, and that 
there is a possible form of social and economic 
Order that is not the impersonal order of the new 
ideologies. Oliveira Salazar has, during the past 
ten years, brought into being in Portugal a Chris- 
tian and Corporate State which provides justice 
for the long-exploited working classes without 
preaching the appalling doctrine of the class war, 
which provides order in the nation without arro- 
gating to the State functions which do not prop- 
erly belong to it, and which appeals to Nationalism 
with due regard for the responsibilities of the Na- 
tion as a component part of a common European 
whole. 

The Corporate conception of society is in its 
essence as old as Europe and the Faith, and the 
neo-Corporatism of Salazar is no more than an at- 
tempt to supersede what is known as Capitalism 
by building according to the principles that were 
rejected when Capitalism began, in its essence it 



INTRODUCTORY 11 

Is no more than an organic conception of society 
which does not forget the Rights of Man, but 
which remembers also what have for so long been 
forgotten: the Duties of Man. The component 
parts of society are disciplined, but they are self- 
disciplined; the State regulates the common whole 
in the common good, but "the State is no more 
than an artificial mechanism at the service of that 
natural organism which is the community: those 
who in it exercise power have only duties towards 
society, which alone has rights/' * The medieval 
Guilds were corporate bodies, integral parts of so- 
ciety, alike protecting their members from others 
and others from their members. Neo-corporatism 
seeks to restore such bodies to society, in some 
form suitable to the very changed needs and con- 
ditions of contemporary life and civilisation. It 
seeks to re-assert that every Right can be expressed 
conversely as a Duty, and that every man has a 
duty towards his neighbor, towards the community 
into which he was born. 

The Corporate State of the New Portugal, of 
the Portugal of Salazar, is an attempt towards the 
establishment of that "sane corporative system" of 
which Pope Pius XI speaks, 2 the principles of 
which have long been advocated by the Catholic 
school of de Mun and Vogelsang and de la Tour 
du Pin. But it is an ideal towards which even in 
England we have witnessed many approaches from 



12 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

various angles. We have seen the Guild Socialists, 
led by Mr. A. J. Pen ty and Mr. A. R. Orage, whose 
ideas may be traced back to Ruskin. Maitland in- 
troduced into England the writings of Otto Gierke, 
who taught the organic nature, the Real Personal- 
ity, of the integral parts of society. And Professor 
Maynard Keynes has expressed himself in favour 
of a form of economic organisation remarkably 
close to the system of corporations: rather than 
State Socialism he would see "the growth of semi- 
autonomous bodies within the State bodies whose 
criterion of action within their own field is solely 
the public good as they understand it, and from 
whose deliberations motives of private advantage 
are excluded bodies which in the ordinary course 
of affairs are mainly autonomous within their pre- 
scribed limitations, but are subject in the last re- 
sort to the sovereignty of the democracy expressed 
through Parliament." 8 

Thanks chiefly to misuse of the word "Fascism" 
by left-wing propaganda, there is a general impres- 
sion abroad that Corporatism implies Imperial- 
ism, or a conviction that guns are more necessary 
than butter. It is not accurate to refer to Germany 
as a Corporate State; Italy is a Corporate State, 
but she appears to reject the international aspect 
of the corporate principle. Internationally, she 
still seems to plead laissez-faire, laissez-passer. Nor 
is it true that Corporatism implies etatisme y or 



INTRODUCTORY lg 

economic nationalism, or any form of neo-pagan- 
Ism. What It does imply It Is the purpose of this 
book to tell, for in contemporary Portugal may be 
seen the truest attempt that has yet been made 
towards a realisation of corporative theory. There 
'is Fascist corporatism In Italy and pseudo-corpora- 
tism in Germany; there Is crippled corporatism In 
Austria, there are the beginnings of corporatism. 
In Switzerland, and there has been corporative ex- 
periment in Bulgaria and elsewhere. But the 
work of Salazar constitutes an experiment unique 
In modern Europe. 

It Is true that since the summer of 1936 the war 
in Spain has given rise in Portugal to a state of 
national emergency, which has compelled Salazar 
to take some measures that he would not have 
countenanced during the eight years of compara- 
tive tranquillity in which he held office previous 
to that war. Conditions of national danger do not 
permit any political experiment to take its natural 
bourse, least of all one which seeks to reduce the 
functions of the State to a minimum. It is the 
threat from the German frontier that has crippled 
the corporative experiment of Schuschnigg and 
the martyred Dollfuss In Austria. But Salazar did 
enough during those eight years to show that he is 
bringing Into being in Portugal a genuine corpo- 
ratism; a corporatisme d? association, as distinct 
from a corporatisme d'etat. It is not true to say of 



14 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

the New Portugal that the State has arrogated 
to itself anything beyond the things which are 
Caesar's. 

Europe to-day is threatened with a war of ide- 
ologies. But the real and ultimate issue is not the 
issue between Fascism and Communism. That is 
not the issue in Spain. Fascism is something 
Italian, as Nazism is something German and 
Soviet Communism something Oriental; whatever 
emerges in Spain will be different from all of 
these, as essentially Spanish as the Portugal of 
Salazar is Portuguese. The issue that Is being 
fought to the death In Spain Is the Issue which Is 
before Europe. It Is this: will that which emerges 
be Christian, or will it be pagan or (which is 
worse) purely atheist and anthropocentric? It 
can be put as simply as that. Those who condone 
the Spanish Government against which General 
Franco has led Spain In revolt think it is merely 
godless; those who fear it think it hates God. At 
present there Is every indication that Franco will 
win. 

That is the second Important reason why con- 
sideration should be given to the Portugal of Sala- 
zar. When Franco has won, there will be an 
Inevitable period of martial law; for a long time 
there must be sporadic unrest, and guerilla war- 
fare will be carried on in the eastern provinces* 
But gradually the New Spain will emerge; and 



INTRODUCTORY 15 

there is every indication that it will follow closely 
the lines of the New Portugal. 4 Franco is a man 
much nearer in blood, and probably much nearer 
in every way, to Salazar than to Mussolini. He 
will be influenced much more by the Spanish and 
Portuguese integral corporativists, and even by 
men like Bottai and Manoilesco the Rumanian, 
than by the model of Italian Fascism. At all 
events, no clearer idea of what the Spanish Na- 
tionalists are fighting to achieve in the material 
order can be gained than by studying the Portugal 
of Salazar. Every political experiment must be 
conditioned by the nature of the people with 
whom it is concerned. There are many different 
peoples in the Iberian Peninsula, of whom the 
Portuguese are one. They are much more akin to 
the Castilians than are the Catalans, but Castile is 
the heart of Spain. Any Corporate State that arises 
in Spain will take its nature from the people of 
Spain, and will be closely akin to the Corporate 
State of the neighbouring people of Portugal. 

There is no natural frontier between Spain and 
Portugal, and, although, with the exception of a 
brief period at the close of the sixteenth century, 
Portugal has been an independent nation for eight 
centuries, there are, apart from history, no greater 
reasons for her independence than there are for 
the independence of Catalonia or the Spanish 
Basques. That is not to say that it would not be a 



l6 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

terrible crime If Portugal were forcibly Incorpo- 
rated in Spain. But General Franco is the de- 
clared opponent of regional autonomies In Spain, 
and reports have reached Lisbon of maps seen 
pinned to the wall at military headquarters at 
Burgos and Salamanca In which Portugal appears 
as a Province of Spain. It is unlikely that there Is 
substance in these reports, or that General Franco 
intends at any date to challenge Portuguese inde- 
pendence. Nevertheless, the possibility cannot be 
ruled out. If when the civil war is over, General 
Franco proves to be unduly under the influence 
of Italy, as is feared by many; and If Italy Is then 
still continuing her policy of opposing British 
naval power in the Mediterranean, it Is conceiv- 
able that, after an interval for national recupera- 
tion, a military offensive against Portugal will be 
launched. For the basis of Portuguese Foreign 
Policy is and will remain her British alliance. 
The mouth of the Tagus provides what is prob- 
ably the finest natural harbour in Europe, and it 
has been virtually at the disposal of the British 
fleet ever since Britain had an interest in the Medi- 
terranean. The harbours of Portugal are of the 
utmost Importance to any Power concerned In the 
Mediterranean; Indeed, according to Mr. H. A. L. 
Fisher, "Lisbon is the key to the Mediterranean/ ' K 
In the possible but, It is hoped, Improbable 
event of an Italo-Spanish offensive being launched 



INTRODUCTORY 17 

against Portugal at some future date, Great Britain 
will therefore be vitally interested. Moreover, she 
will be bound by treaty to go to the assistance of 
Portugal. 

In speculating thus about the possible evil 
results to Portugal of excessive Italian influence 
accompanying a Nationalist victory in Spain, it 
should not be forgotten that the victory of inter- 
national Communism would have presented her 
with a much more certain menace. "A union of 
Iberian Soviet republics that is our aim/' said 
Largo Caballero to the American journalist Ed- 
ward Knoblaugh. "The Iberian peninsula will 
again be one country. Portugal will come in, 
peaceably we hope, but by force if necessary. . . . 
Lenin declared Spain would be the second Soviet 
Republic in Europe. Lenin's prophecy will come 
true. I shall be the second Lenin who shall make 
it come true.." If any such onslaught had been 
made, Portugal would equally have had the right 
to demand the intervention of Great Britain. Let 
this be remembered by those who so bitterly de- 
nounce General Franco, the defender of Portugal 
as well as of Spain from the Comintern. 

There is no doubt that the present years are ex- 
tremely critical ones for Portugal, and the Anglo- 
Portuguese alliance provides the third important 
reason why attention should be given in England 
to Salazar and his work. That alliance is the oldest 



l8 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

In Europe. On October 25, 1937, Lisbon cele- 
brated the seven hundred and ninetieth anniver- 
sary of the first co-operation of the English with 
the Portuguese against a common foe. 

In 1147 Affonso Henriquez, the first King of 
Portugal, took Lisbon from the Moors, with the 
assistance of some English Knights on their way to 
the second Crusade, and an English monk of Win- 
chelsea became the first Bishop of Lisbon. The 
citadel then captured Is still known as the Castle 
of St. George. Six centuries ago, on May 9, 1386, 
the English and Portuguese signed a Treaty at 
Windsor, "for ever"; and although the alliance 
dates really only from the Treaty of 1642, it has 
endured to this day: the destinies of two Atlantic 
European nations have been linked together. The 
English navigators followed the great Portuguese 
discoverers of the age of Prince Henry the Navi- 
gator (whose mother was an English woman) to 
found the British Empire. When a Portuguese 
princess of the Royal House of Braganza married 
Charles II of England, she brought to England as 
her dowry Bombay, an Important base in India, 
and Tangier, which was England's first naval base 
in the Mediterranean. The alliance was renewed 
a generation later by the Methuen Treaties, and 
the English gentry, to the great detriment of their 
health but to the benefit of an historic friendship, 
began to drink port instead of claret. A century 



INTRODUCTORY 1Q 

later, British and Portuguese fought together to 
drive Napoleon from the Peninsula, and in 1916 
they were fighting together in Flanders. To-day 
the alliance is as secure as ever, and is strength- 
ened by important commercial bonds. In Febru- 
ary 1938, a British naval and military mission will 
visit Portugal to investigate the present possibili- 
ties of collaboration in war should the necessity 
arise. 

The connections between Great Britain and 
Portugal, then, are of the closest. In 1933, when 
the new Portuguese Constitution was approved by 
a national plebiscite, The Times wrote in a lead- 
ing article that "the course of the new regime will 
be followed with the greatest sympathy and inter- 
est in this country/' 6 That was nearly five years 
ago; yet practically no public interest has been 
shown; while public sympathy has been steadily 
diminishing ever since war broke out in Spain and 
the Comintern began to put about the legend, at 
once accepted, that Portugal is "Fascist" and a 
satellite state of Italy. Despite the prophecy of 
The Times, this brief book represents the first at- 
tempt that has been made by an Englishman to 
understand and to describe the mind and work of 
Salazar. 

It is its purpose to indicate what is the real na- 
ture of contemporary Portugal. It will attempt 
also to indicate what contemporary Portugal is 



20 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

not. M. Mihail Manoilesco has done some valu- 
able debunking In his book Le Siecle du Corpora- 

tisme. 7 He makes clear five important things 
about corporatism: 

(1) That modern corporatism must necessarily 
be very different from, and is not to be 
confused with, the medieval Guild system. 

(2) That it cannot be confounded with Fas- 
cism, in spite of the progress which, in the 
exclusively economic form, it has made un- 
der that regime. 

(3) That it is not a hypocritical instrument for 
the consolidation of the existing social con- 
ditions with all their iniquities. 

(4) That it does not restrict itself to the organ- 
ization of the material forces of the nation 
only, but that it constitutes the sole means 
of integrating every aspect of the national 
life. 

(5) That It does not mean the mobilization of 
the egotism of groups against the national 
interest, but, on the contrary, the accept- 
ance of the principle of the common good. 

We would not say that we agree In all things 
with M. Manoilesco; and we think, for instance, 
that Salazar would not countenance the degree of 
etatisme that appears in his exposition of corpora- 
tive theory. Nevertheless, these five caveats must 



PORTUGAL 21 

be borne well in mind by all who would under- 
stand the corporatism of Portugal and Salazar. 



ii 
PORTUGAL 

PORTUGAL has an area on the mainland of Europe 
of 34,254 square miles, and an Atlantic coastline 
of some 350 miles. Her population in 1930 was 
6,826,000, and is to-day probably about seven mil- 
lions, since the birth-rate, although declining, Is 
still substantially higher than the death-rate. 8 Al- 
though in area she Is about the same, her popula- 
tion is therefore considerably greater than that of 
Ireland. In many ways, however, Portugal may 
be compared to Ireland: she looks out on to the 
Atlantic from the western edge of Europe, and her 
people are people of the Celtic fringe. Many 
travellers have been reminded of the Irish by the 
Portuguese, and to many the Portuguese landscape 
has been strangely reminiscent of Ireland. Thus 
Mr. Douglas Goldring wrote recently: "Portugal 
is a small, compact, and manageable (sic) country 
about the size of Ireland, which in a queer indefi- 
nite way it resembles. At least, I found myself con- 
stantly thinking of Ireland as I travelled through 
it, although the differences between the two coun- 
tries are obvious/' 9 Or again, Mr. Aubrey Bell 



22 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

writes In what has become a standard work about 
the Portuguese 10 : "In some measure, those who 
know the Irish peasant know the Portuguese. . . . 
Indeed, if you take the Irish peasantry, add hot 
sun, a spice o the East, and perhaps something of 
the negro's vanity and slight hold on life, you have 
the Portuguese. The quick intelligence, the 
dreaming melancholy, the slyness and love of in- 
trigue, the wit and imagination are here, and the 
power of expression in words. Generosity, too, 
and habits as unpractical as could be desired/' 

And since this is a book about the present con- 
dition of Portugal, rather than about the Portu- 
guese people, we will leave it at that: that none 
can know the Portuguese without visiting their 
country, but that those who know the Irish will 
know also the Portuguese in some degree. 

You get very different types in different parts of 
the country, of course -the dwellers In the high 
lands of Beira and the Minho and Tras os Montes; 
the farmers of the Alemtejo, the land beyond the 
Tagus; the excitable algarvios of the south; and so 
on but the Portuguese have been an independent 
people for eight centuries, with the exception of 
sixty uneasy years between 1580 and 1640, and 
that could not have been so had they not been a 
race apart from Spain. There are many peoples 
in Spain, and It Is impossible to say (I write in 
December 1937) when again they will live under 



PORTUGAL 23 

a common rule; but the Portuguese are different 
from them all. 

We will not attempt to trace their racial pedi- 
gree: that would be impossible. The Portuguese 
have been all over the world, and all over the 
world they have intermarried with their native 
dependents. The Celt-Iberian stock of Portugal 
survived the centuries of Moorish overlords as it 
had survived the overlordship of Romans and Visi- 
goths: but into the Celt-Iberian stock has been 
infused a surprising amount of negroid blood. 
The Chronicles of Azurara X1 describe how the sys- 
tematic introduction of African negroes into Por- 
tugal dates from the time of Henry the Navigator. 
Right up to the end of the eighteenth century all 
the big families of Portugal had large numbers of 
negro servants, and, in the almost complete ab- 
sence of that colour prejudice so characteristic of 
the Anglo-Saxons, a definite negroid strain in the 
Portuguese people has resulted. To-day there is 
in Africa a great contrast between the way the 
Portuguese and British regard their black colo- 
nials. A result is that the Portuguese for centuries 
retained their colonial Empire without the help 
of any considerable army. It is rare to-day to meet 
a coloured man in Portugal, or even in Lisbon; 
but the negroid strain is very often apparent. It 
would not be an altogether bad thing if Portu- 
guese nationalism to-day became infected with a 



24 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

little of the racial madness that characterises the 
nationalism of Germany, for their extremely 
mixed blood is an undoubted source of weakness 
to the race. However, It accentuates the contrast 
with the Spanish. 

Spain is a Mediterranean country, but Portugal 
looks out upon the Atlantic. The Spanish con- 
quistadores and the English discoverers of the six- 
teenth century followed where the Portuguese led; 
it is the Atlantic that has made the greatness of 
Portugal. To-day, Lisbon provides the starting- 
place for the most important north Atlantic cross- 
Ing by air, and the Portuguese Azores a half-way 
house. The Portuguese Admiral Gago Coutinho 
and his friend, the late Sacadura Cabral, were the 
first men to fly the southern Atlantic non-stop. 

Spain turns her life toward her great Mediter- 
ranean coast that runs from Cape Cervera to the 
Straits of Gibraltar; her Atlantic coastline is no 
more than a narrow strip, separated from the in- 
terior by the Cantabrian mountains. She is so big 
and her life is so various that she is almost com- 
plete as a continent by herself; and she is isolated 
from Europe by the Pyrenees. Portugal looks out 
upon the Ocean, and is linked by the Ocean to 
Europe: she is the little Europe beyond Spain. 
Her culture is Romano-Celtic rather than Iberian. 

The reconquest of Portugal from the Moors 
took place eight centuries ago: the first King of 



PORTUGAL 25 

Portugal was the half-legendary Affonso Henri- 
quez, who proclaimed himself after the famous 
battle of Oraique in 1139. The nation reached 
the frontiers which are hers to-day during the 
reign of Affonso III (1248-1279); and a long 
period of intermittent warfare with Leon and Cas- 
tile ended with the battle of Aljubarrota, in 1385, 
from which dates the complete independence of 
Portugal. That battle was won by Joao I, first 
King of the House of Avlz, and father by his Eng- 
lish wife of Prince Henry the Navigator. 

During the whole of the fourteenth century a 
vigorous civilisation was developing in Portugal; 
and in particular that splendid tradition of sea- 
manship which was to be the national glory was 
being steadily built up. Under Joao I the period 
of maritime expansion began, with the conquest 
of Ceuta in 1415; but it was under the inspiration 
of his son, Prince Henry the Navigator, that Por- 
tugal discovered the world for Europe. The story 
of Bartolomeo Diaz and Vasco de Gama, of Affonso 
Albuquerque and Duarte Pacheco Pereira, has 
been told often enough by historians since it was 
sung in epic verse by Carnoes, the national poet: 
it cannot be told again here. The Portuguese 
were the first Europeans to round the Cape, the 
first to reach India; as the colonisers of Brazil, they 
shared with the Spanish the discovery of the new 



26 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

world. The Portugal of Salazar has the memory 
of her great age in her colonial Empire. 

The Portuguese Empire of to-day represents a 
total area of over 850,000 square miles, which is 
about twenty-five times the size of Portugal in Eu- 
rope. That is a fact now looked upon by the Ger- 
mans with a jealous eye; although it must be 
remembered that there are three other European 
powers whose foreign possessions are proportion- 
ately more extensive. 

In Europe, Portugal has the archipelagoes of 
Madeira and the Azores, which are regarded for 
administrative purposes as provinces of the main- 
land. In Africa she has the extremely valuable 
territories of Angola on the west coast and Mozam- 
bique on the east. She has also Cabinda, a small 
piece of the coastline of the Belgian Congo, and 
Guinea; and off the west coast she owns a consid- 
erable number of islands, of which the most im- 
portant are the Cape Verde Islands, the Bissagos 
Islands, Prince's Island, and St. Thomas. On the 
west coast of India she still has Goa, to which she 
proudly refers as ''The State of India." In the 
East Indies she shares the island of Timor with the 
Dutch, and in China she has Macao, a trading sta- 
tion opposite Hong-Kong at the mouth of the Si- 
Kiang River. 

The problems and affairs of the Portuguese 
Empire are outside the scope of this book. Its 



PORTUGAL 27 

present position and the principles to be observed 
in its administration are defined in the Colonial 
Act of July 8, 1930, which was drawn up by Dr. 
Salazar, who temporarily assumed the Ministry 
of Colonies for that purpose; and, by Article 
CXXXIII of the Constitution of 1933, "the pro- 
visions of the Colonial Act shall be regarded as 
constitutional matter/* The very pressing colo- 
nial problem was then vigorously tackled by a bril- 
liant Colonial Minister, Dr. Armindo Monteiro. 
Dr. Monteiro is now ambassador in London, and 
when an honorary degree was recently conferred 
upon him by the University of Oxford, the Public 
Orator described him as "a second founder of the 
Portuguese Colonial Empire/' 

The Colonial Act, with its later complementary 
laws, is an application of the corporative theory of 
Dr. Salazar which it is the chief purpose of this 
book to discuss. As the nation is an organic 
whole, so is the Empire. The colonies are bound 
to co-operate, as are the corporative bodies, as 
members of the same commonwealth; but the 
greatest possible measure of autonomy is to be 
given to each colonial government, as to each cor- 
poration. The underlying idea is decentralisation 
so far as is consonant with a high sense of common 
destiny and a common responsibility. The cor- 
porative organisation of each colony has not yet 
been carried very far, but its main bases were de- 



28 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

fined early In 1937 ^7 Decree-Law No. 27552. 
From the preamble to that we may quote a sig- 
nificant passage, since in the matter of the colonial 
Empire we have found a brief preliminary reflec- 
tion of the corporatism of Salazar. "The time has 
come to lay down the principles of Colonial Cor- 
porativism. The principles formulated are pur- 
posely broad and general, so as to be applicable to 
existing conditions. The Government has no 
wish to formulate cast-iron regulations which sub- 
sequently might be found to be impracticable or 
prejudicial, and desires principally to co-ordinate 
the economic activity of the colonies so that the 
highest possible results may be secured. There is 
no claim of infallibility made for schemes outlined 
in the present Decree-Law. They may have to be 
altered, added to, or even replaced by others, as 
actual practice shall dictate/' 

In that paragraph we see illustrated one of the 
greatest strengths of the Estado Novo: that Is, Its 
avoidance of a "cast-iron" system, and its continual 
and frank acknowledgment that Its present stage is 
purely experimental. That is one of the chief 
reasons why the Estado Novo, the Portugal of 
Salazar, will live. 

The Portugal of Salazar Is a Christian and Cor- 
porate State. The purpose of this book is to give 
some indication of what that means, both objec- 
tively, In describing the principles on which It Is 



PORTUGAL 29 

built, how they are Christian and, in the truest 
sense of that much-abused word, democratic, and 
how it differs from the experiments in national 
reconstruction that are in process in Italy and 
Germany; and subjectively, in describing how it 
represents a vindication of the historic Portugal, a 
truly national resurrection after a century in 
which an alien and artificial Liberalism reduced 
the country to chaos. The Estado Novo is essen- 
tially Christian: it is also essentially Portuguese. 

The Englishman who can think of a national 
revival only in terms of what is known as "the 
standard of living/' or of trade balance, or of pub- 
lic works, will be surprised to find little reference 
to such criteria in this book. To many, Dr. Sala- 
zar is known only as one of the most brilliant 
Finance Ministers of modern times. It was in that 
capacity that he first entered public life. He 
found his country mortgaged and bankrupt: he 
has set her affairs in order for the first time for 
centuries, and has made her "almost independent 
of international finance/' 13 In any country his 
financial administration would have been remark- 
able; in Portugal, it is almost miraculous. 

On a basis of sound finance an extensive pro- 
gramme of public works has been undertaken. 
Motor roads have been made throughout a coun- 
try which previously was almost inaccessible ex- 



30 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

cept by mule. In telegraphic and telephonic com- 
munications, in education, in railways, in harbour 
works, and in housing, much has been done. But 
we shall not assess Portugal's debt to Dr. Salazar in 
terms of reinforced concrete. 



CHAPTER 



i 

THE RECORD OF THE REPUBLIC 

/IT is the purpose of this book to describe what 
^j Portugal is like to-day, rather, thaii what she 
has been like in the past. But it is not possible to 
discuss Salazar without placing him in his histori- 
cal context, and particularly in his context in 
recent Portuguese history. The only way to in- 
troduce Salazar is to give some idea o the Portugal 
into which he was born and in which he grew up; 
we will go back to the last years o the Monarchy, 
when he was a boy being educated at a seminary 
in Upper Beira. 

On May 18, 1906, Carlos I, King of Portugal, 
did that which led directly to his murder two years 
later: he gave charge of the Portuguese Govern- 
ment to a man who represented neither of the 
two parties which had for long been alternating 
in power. For years the Regeneradores and the 
Progressists, each a political gang depending on 
demagogy, corruption, and cadquismo^ or the 
support of petty tyrants, had played the political 
game unchallenged. The country, says the Cam- 

31 



32 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

bridge Modern History, was "governed by con- 
tending factions of professional politicians, who 
have no other care than their own immediate per- 
sonal advantage." x That is understatement. The 
politicians at San Bento had this care, that their 
machinations should not interfere with the oli- 
garchy that exploited the nation. The perpetual 
political puppet-show was no more than a drop- 
scene, a sordid scramble that concealed the un- 
challenged sway of the rich, while the people 
starved and the nation drifted more and more into 
the control of foreign bondholders. The system 
was ostensibly Liberal democracy on the English 
pattern; in fact it was the worst kind of govern- 
ment by oligarchy. 

This state of affairs was challenged in May 
1906, by King Carlos, when he called to power a 
man named Franco, which word means 'Tree/' 
He had the temerity publicly to express the hope 
that this man might prove strong enough to ad- 
minister the nation in the national interest. The 
immediate result was a great storm of protest, and 
the redoubling of efforts to secure the overthrow 
of the Monarchy. Chief among the Republicans 
were the Freemasons of the Portuguese Grand 
Orient, who had long sought to install a com- 
pletely Masonic oligarchy, and whose organisation 
was both formidable and extensive. In the elec- 
tions of August, four important Republican depu- 



THE RECORD OF THE REPUBLIC 3 

ties were returned to the Cortes, Including 
Antonio Jose de Almeida, who had led the Ma- 
sonic revolution in Oporto in 1891, and Affonso 
Costa, leader of the Carbonarios, the terrorist 
forces of Masonry, and of the "White Ants/' his 
own particular organisation, editor of the Repub- 
lican newspaper O Mundo, and probably the 
most unscrupulous demagogue that Portugal has 
ever known. By May 1907, there was complete 
political deadlock, and the King was faced with 
the alternatives of dismissing Franco or dissolving 
the Cortes. On May i oth he dissolved the Cortes, 
and Joao Franco stood alone, the most hated man 
in Lisbon. 

He at once embarked on a programme of reform. 
Despite all opposition, something was achieved. 
The budgetary deficit, which for years had been 
steadily increasing, was diminished, and a rela- 
tively honest administration brought the national 
finances into a more promising position than they 
had known for years. It was a dictatorship, in so 
far as the professional politicians had for the time 
being been thrust aside; but it was only a tempo- 
rary dictatorship, since elections had been prom- 
ised for the April of the following year, 1908. 
And "all those whose interests were menaced by 
the proposed reforms, all the comfortable rotati- 
vists and political hypocrites, all those who wished 
to gain credit by themselves initiating the reforms, 



34 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

and hated them when coming from another, were 
united against Senhor Franco/' wrote an English 
Liberal who was in Lisbon at the time. "Never 
have party passions so blinded all the politicians 
of a country to that country's Interests as in the 
violent and, one may well add, cowardly attacks 
on Senhor Francoit is scarcely surprising that he 
should have been obliged to resort to methods 
more arbitrary, which of course drew scandalised 
cries of rage from those who had made them neces- 
sary. ... He had not begun by employing arbi- 
trary methods. 'The Republican party/ wrote a 
Portuguese journalist, 'asked above all for liberty/ 
and the first thing the Government of Joao 
Franco did was to give it liberty. What was the 
result? The Republicans declared in the news- 
papers that they did not want the liberty given 
them by the Government/' 2 

Franco was governing in the name of no party 
or clique, but in the name of Portugal; and the 
journals of Republican and Royalist, of Regen- 
erador and Progressista alike, were united, for 
once, in opposition to him. But opposition more 
formidable than mere newspaper abuse was being 
marshalled to crush this new concept of govern- 
ment as a public service. The Grand Master of 
the Portuguese Grand Orient, Dr. Magalhaes 
Lima, went abroad to discuss with the heads of 
international Freemasonry what was to be done. 



THE RECORD OF THE REPUBLIC 35 

An address delivered by him at the Cosmos Lodge 
in Paris on November 19, 1907, appeared on the 
agenda paper in these terms: "Portugal decay of 
the Monarchy, necessity of a Republicanismthe 
future o the Republic/' He was engaged In his 
diplomatic mission until the end of the year; all in 
touch with Masonry knew what was afoot. On 
December 25th there appeared in the Bulletin of 
the Association anti-ma gonnique de France a pre- 
diction by the Abbe Tourmentin that the over- 
throw of King Carlos was imminent. Five weeks 
later, on February i, 1908, the King, together 
with his eldest son, Dom Luis, was shot dead in 
the streets of Lisbon. Five years later the politi- 
cal gang who called themselves the "Democrats" 
erected a mausoleum in Lisbon in honour of 
Bui^a and Costa, the men of the Carbonarios who 
did the deed. 

The brief reign of the young King Manoel 
opened with the dismissal of Franco by Queen 
Amelia, who had seen her husband shot down, and 
knew to what he owed his death. "The Constitu- 
tional Monarchy, now more constitutional and 
less of a monarchy than ever, could offer the na- 
tion nothing but empty promises/' wrote Sir 
George Young, Secretary to the British Legation 
at Lisbon. "The Cortes at once relapsed into the 
frenzy of faction that has nullified its function 
ever since the end of the old routine rotativism in 



36 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

1906. No faction had any public force behind it, 
and no coalition of factions had any consistency, 
so that ministries followed one another at intervals 
of one or two months, or even weeks." 8 

Plans for the proclamation of the Republic pro- 
ceeded rapidly, under the inspiration of some few 
who genuinely thought that therein lay the solu- 
tion to the country's difficulties, and of Masonry, 
which wished thereby to gather control of the 
country solely to itself. Dr. Magalhaes Lima went 
again on a diplomatic tour in September 1910, 
conferring with the heads of Masonry in Brussels. 
Paris, and Madrid. In the first days of October 
the Revolution took place; the House of Braganza 
went into exile, and Portugal became a Republic. 
"It was a thunderbolt for the non-instructed pub- 
lic/' said M. Furnemont, Grand Orator of the 
Belgian Grand Orient. "But we, my brethren, 
we knew. . . . We had the secret of this glorious 
event." 'The work of the Portuguese Revolution 
is due exclusively to Masonry/' wrote Machado 
Santos, the young lieutenant who had led it after 
the unfortunate suicide of Admiral Candido dos 
Reis, on page 34 of the Report which he published 
In 1911. It was not a true boast, but it was very 
nearly true. 

It Is not to be denied that the Monarchy was 
effete; It is not to be maintained that all Republi- 
cans were dishonest men. But It is to be main- 



THE RECORD OF THE REPUBLIC 37 

talned that that gang of Masonic Republicans that 
made the Portuguese Republic in 1910 made it to 
secure a hegemony for themselves. I am aware 
that to attribute all the evils of this time to Free- 
masonry is as absurd as the attribution by anti- 
clericals of all evils to the Jesuits. But I am also 
aware that few English readers have any idea of 
the part that is played and has been played in the 
past in continental politics by international Free- 
masonry, which seeks to reserve all power to itself 
and to crush the Catholic Church, and which in 
thus seeking to exclude its opponents from gov- 
ernment and to impede the practice of the Faith 
of Europe represents the very negation of democ- 
racy. Those who wish for a fuller account of 
Masonic intervention will find it, fully docu- 
mented, in Le Portugal Renatt* by the Vicomte 
Leon de Poncins. In particular, they will find in 
the appendix to that work, supported throughout 
by quotation from Masonic documents, a detailed 
exposition of the way in which the Lusitanian 
Grand Orient has aspired to the domination of 
the Portuguese Republic. 

In 1910, then, that Masonic gang among the 
Republicans who chose to call themselves "Demo- 
crats" were installed in power. They called them- 
selves democrats, but they were at once involved 
in conflict with organisations of the working 
classes. "In 191 1, the difficult first year of the Re- 



38 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

public, Lisbon was threatened with a general 
strike, and local strikes were epidemic everywhere. 
In January 1912, a revolutionary strike in Lisbon 
was only quelled by the declaration of martial law 
and the arrest of over a thousand syndicalists/' 5 
And so on: nothing like it had been known before. 
They called themselves democrats, but they at 
once began a systematic and rigorous persecution 
of the religion of the poor. The first act of the 
Republic, in 1910, was to expel all the religious 
orders and to confiscate their property. In 1911 a 
lengthy decree was promulgated, giving detailed 
directions regarding the persecution of the Church 
and the penalisation of religion. Church prop- 
erty was confiscated, and in 1912 the Archbishops 
of Portalegre and Braga were expelled from the 
country. The family was attacked by the secu- 
larisation of marriage and the institution of di- 
vorce. They called themselves democrats, but 
they maintained themselves in power by the terror 
of the Carbonarios and by the cult of the bomb, 
extolled as the instrument of liberty. 

The record of the Republic between 1910 and 
1936 may thus be summarised in figures: during 
those sixteen years there were eight Presidents of 
the Republic (although by the 1911 Constitution 
the President was to be elected for four years) ; 
and there were forty-three different Ministries 
(although by the 1911 Constitution elections were 



THE RECORD OF THE REPUBLIC 39 

to take place every three years, or five times dur- 
ing that period, so that these changes of govern- 
ment were not even in appearance connected with 
the people) . The first Government of the Re- 
public did not last ten weeks; the longest lasted 
little over a year. Revolution in Portugal became 
a by-word in Europe. The nation's finances passed 
from a condition which, although bad, seemed re- 
deemable, to one which in 1927 was apparently 
hopeless. Budgetary deficits reached appalling fig- 
ures, and periodical borrowings to cope with them 
sent the national debt to an amount equally ap- 
palling. The cost of living increased twenty-five 
fold, and the currency fell to one thirty-third part 
of its gold value. Before Portugal left the gold 
standard, in 1891, the exchange value of the Es- 
cudo (which is the Portuguese monetary unit) 
was 4.5 to the pound. In 1913 the rate of exchange 
was still 5.25 to the pound. But in 1925 the aver- 
age rate was 131.563 to the pound. 

It is true that the Great War had intervened; 
but the Great War might have seen the rehabilita- 
tion instead of the further collapse of the national 
finances, since it brought to the national credit the 
financial backing of the City of London. A vice- 
governor of the Bank of Portugal has emphasised: 
' 'Unlike those of most other nations, the resources 
of Portugal were not unduly taxed by the War 
the crisis came from what may be called the spirit 



40 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

of the War that Is to say, the spirit of makeshift, 
of laxity, of squandering, of disorder." 6 A chief 
cause of the national bankruptcy was an Inade- 
quate revenue due to under-taxatlon and corrupt 
exemption under the Republic. 

The financial question will be summarised 
later: the only point to be made here is that the 
nation was administered before Salazar In the very 
short-sighted Interests of an oligarchy. We have 
noted the episode of Joao Franco, who challenged 
the oligarchy. There were two further challenges 
made before it was crushed by the national rising 
of 1926: those of General PImenta de Castro and 
President Sidonio Paes. 

In January 1915, a military pronunciamiento 
led to the overthrow of the seventh Government 
of the Republic and gave power to General Pi- 
menta de Castro. Lest this brief factual summary 
be taken for mere pamphleteer advocacy of au- 
thoritarianism we will quote again from Mr. A. F. 
G. Bell, than whom no living Englishman has 
a more intimate knowledge of Portugal. "There 
was a general breath of relief throughout the 
country, and by an odd paradox this new Govern- 
ment born of a military movement, this 'dictator- 
ship/ this 'tyranny/ proved the most moderate 
Government that Portugal had seen since the 
Revolution of 1910. With equal moderation and 
firmness one measure after another was enacted in 



THE RECORD OF THE REPUBLIC 41 

order to bring about the long-dreamt reconcilia- 
tion of all Portuguese. Churches were restored to 
the use of the faithful, officials arbitrarily dis- 
missed were restored to their posts, the 'White 
Ants' were sent about their business, their so-called 
'Committee of Public Safety' abolished, and finally 
in April a general amnesty emptied the prisons 
and allowed the eleven exiles of the 1914 amnesty 
to return to Portugal. O but, say the Democrats, 
it was all so unconstitutional! Such a dictator- 
ship! Of course it was unconstitutional. The 
Constitution has been so ordered (Mr. Bell is writ- 
ing in June 1915) that the Democrats having 
installed themselves in power and they had been 
in power in fact if not in name since the Revolu- 
tioncould never be dislodged by constitutional 
means. Their majority in the Chamber of Depu- 
ties was secure, their majorities in the town coun- 
cils throughout the country, and in the officials 
responsible for returning the new deputies, 
equally secure. It became necessary to dissolve 
these bodies, by force if they would not go will- 
ingly. But the country which had suffered from 
four years of constitutional tyranny was delighted 
to have a little unconstitutional moderation. In 
vain the Democrats cried out that it was a dictator- 
ship worse than the dictatorship of Joao Franco. 
If, answered common-sense opinion, the Govern- 
ment which empties the prisons, maintains order, 



42 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

and acts in every respect so fairly and moderately, 
is a dictatorship, then may all succeeding Govern- 
ments be tarred with the dictatorial brush. Only 
so will the future of the Republic and of Portugal 
be secure." 7 

Mr. Bell is, I repeat, an Englishman and a Lib- 
eral; he is not a political controversialist, but a 
distinguished man of letters who has lived all his 
life in Portugal He wrote this judgment on Pi- 
menta de Castro at Estoril, a few miles outside 
Lisbon, in June 1915, before the words "Fascist" 
and "Nazi" had been invented. He knew exactly 
what he was writing about, and exactly what Lib- 
eral Democracy means and always has meant in 
the Iberian Peninsula: he knew exactly the value 
of that Portuguese political party which called it- 
self "Democrat/' which, in May 1915, engineered 
mutiny in the army and the navy in order to dis- 
place Pimenta de Castro and restore itself to 
power. "The Democrat party," he wrote, "will 
always be known as the party which, under cover 
of the World War, raised itself to power over the 
dead bodies of its fellow countrymen." 7 

Sidonio Paes became President of the Portu- 
guese Republic on May 9, 1917, a fortnight after 
Affonso Costa had become Prime Minister for the 
third time. Paes (whose name means "the coun- 
try") was a man with a great popular following 
and a strong patriotic sense; as Franco and de 



THE RECORD OF THE REPUBLIC 45 

Castro had done, he challenged that political hege- 
mony which Affonso , Costa represented. That 
meant that he would be attacked and attacked 
again. He was also an ex-Mason (his name in the 
Lodges had been brother Carlyle) . That meant 
death. For seven months he tried to work through 
the 1911 Constitution: it was not possible, least of 
all with Dr. Affonso Costa at the head of the Gov- 
ernment. On December 5th he turned out the 
Government and proclaimed a dictatorship. It 
should be remembered that in these days before 
Mussolini and Hitler the word "dictatorship" was 
still used in the sense in which the Romans used 
it: it meant the temporary concentration of power 
in one man in time of national necessity. The 
dictatorship of Sidonio Paes had the support of 
the people; it also had the support of the army, 
which, being a cross-section of the people and rela- 
tively immune from political brow-beating, is 
nearly always in Spain and Portugal the truest in- 
dication of national opinion. Affonso Costa was 
imprisoned: if the President had been in danger 
of assassination before, he was certain of it now. 
"Acclaimed by the crowd, he enjoyed a great 
popularity in the eyes of the masses of the country, 
which quickly felt the happy results of his good 
administration." s In a Latin and Catholic coun- 
try like Portugal, the treatment of religion always 
provides a sure indication of the extent to which a 



44 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

Government is genuinely popular and democratic. 
Sidonio Paes gave justice to the Church which had 
been so relentlessly persecuted by the anti-clerical 
Masonry of the Republic. Diplomatic relations 
with the Vatican were restored; the Cardinal- 
Archbishop was allowed to return to Lisbon, But 
the rule o Sidonio Paes lasted only a year. At 
midnight on the night of December 14, 1918, he 
was murdered by a hireling of the Freemasons on 
the platform of the main station at Lisbon/ and 
Portugal fell back into confusion for another eight 
years. 

From 1919 to 1926 the succession of "Govern- 
ments" became even more rapid and bewildering. 
Terrorism and political assassination became gen- 
eral. Three hundred and twenty-five bombs burst 
in the streets of Lisbon (according to official po- 
lice figures) between 1920 and 1925; the bloodiest 
night was that of October 19, 1921, when the 
Prime Minister, Antonio Joaquim Granjo, met 
his death, with many others. The affairs of the 
country were in complete disorder. It became in- 
creasingly difficult to borrow to pay interest due 
on previous debts. And beneath the surface of 
chaos in public affairs, the people became more 
and more restless. The rule of the Republic was 
anarchy; the freedom of the Freemasons was ter- 
ror. It was against this that the nation rose in 
May 1926. 



THE MAN FROM NOWHERE 45 

II 
THE MAN FROM NOWHERE 

THE Nation rose in May 1926: it was again the 
army that gave expression to the anger and despair 
of the people. On May 2 7th a brief manifesto, 
signed by the veteran Marshal Gomez da Costa, 
who had led the Portuguese Expeditionary Force 
to Flanders in the Great War, appeared on the 
walls of the garrison city of Braga: 

'Tor men of dignity and honour the political 
condition of the country is intolerable. 

Portugal: to arms, for the liberty and honour 

of the Nation! 5 ' 

On the following day, a day which has become 
famous in the history of Portugal, men of every 
political opinion, Republican and Royalist alike, 
followed the army in a march on Lisbon: it was a 
march of patriots against the oligarchy. It was a 
march from the north, from the capital of the an- 
cient Kings, from the first Kingdom of Portugal 
from which Lisbon and the south had been 
wrested eight centuries before from the Moors. 

The Government, the sixth of Antonio da Silva, 
resigned on May goth: on the gist the President 
of the Republic, Bernardino Ma^hado, apostle of 
the bomb, renounced his charge in a letter to 



46 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

Commander Mendez Cabe<:adas, leader of the 
revolution in Lisbon, who took power into his 
own hands until Marshal da Costa formally en- 
tered the city at the head of the army on June 
i^th. Shortly afterwards, da Costa, feeling that 
his work was done, made over the leadership to 
General Oscar Carmona: it is to these three men, 
da Costa, Carmona, and Cabe^adas, that the revo- 
lution that was to end revolution is due. Not a 
shot had been fired. By the middle of June the 
drift of a nation to disaster had been arrested. 

A brief proclamation, signed by Marshal da 
Costa, told what was the purpose of the coup 
d'etat: 

"The Nation desires a National Government, 
composed of its most able citizens, to bring back 
to the administration of the State its lost disci- 
pline and honour. 

"The Nation has had enough of the tyranny 
of irresponsible politicians. It wants a strong 
Government, whose object shall be the saving 
of the country and the institution of a real 
representation of the genuine, living, and per- 
manent interests of Portugal. 

"United with you in the hope of the redemp- 
tion of our country, I proclaim the National 
interest against the fatal sway of politicians and 
parties, and I offer to the tormented country a 



THE MAN FROM NOWHERE 47 

strong Government, capable of presenting a 
brave face to internal and external foes." 

The military Junta was rapidly able to establish 
public order. But in the matter of constructive 
politics the gallant soldiers had no very precise 
ideas. Da Costa was rather vague in his diagnosis 
of the situation: he was a soldier and no politician, 
but he had professed Liberalism all his life, and 
was not able to understand that Liberalism as 
known in Portugal was responsible for the sad 
situation against which he had led the army. Car- 
mona was a man of longer vision who asked for 
radical reform, and not only reform, but re-forma- 
tion of the political structure of the nation. He 
knew that if that were not forthcoming the mili- 
tary coup d'etat of 1926 would be of no more ulti- 
mate effect than had been those of 1915 and 1917. 
Fortunately for Portugal, his urgency prevailed 
and Marshal da Costa withdrew in his favour. 

The most immediate and pressing necessity was 
to find a man capable of taking charge of the na- 
tion's finances. The soldier who was first given 
responsibility for that department called together 
the various officials of his Ministry and (so the 
story goes) announced to them: "I know abso- 
lutely nothing about finances myself, except that 
my own are in complete disorder." So were those 
of the nation: and the restoration of some sort of 



48 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

order to them an apparently hopeless task was 
necessarily the first step to be taken In any work 
of national reconstruction. It was decided that 
the best thing to do was to approach the Professor 
of Political Economy in the University of Coim- 
bra. The Professor reluctantly agreed to under- 
take the work: he arrived at his Ministry on Fri- 
day, June 4, 1926. On the following Thursday, 
finding that he was required to work circum- 
scribed by restrictions which made work impos- 
sible, he took the train back to Colmbra. He 
would not, and could not, assume responsibility 
unless he were given absolute discretion. The 
Ministry was then given to General Sinel de 
Cordes, who was quite unequal to the situation. 
In the autumn of 1927 it was decided that there 
was no alternative but to apply to the Financial 
Committee of the League of Nations for a loan 
such as had been granted through it to Austria, 
Hungary, Bulgaria, and other countiies whose re- 
covery from the War would otherwise have been 
impossible. The sum of 12,000,000 was required 
as being necessary for financial reconstruction and 
monetary stabilisation. 

A League Commission visited Portugal and re- 
ported favourably; the loan should be granted, 
but Its administration should be left in the hands 
of the League of Nations, which should also con- 
duct an exhaustive preliminary inquiry into the 



THE MAN FROM NOWHERE 49 

financial condition o the nation and of the Bank 
of Portugal. These conditions were immediately 
rejected by the Government and by popular opin- 
ion alike. National sentiment had been roused 
by the recent revolution, and by the appeal to his- 
tory of those responsible for it; and the humili- 
ating proposal that the national administration 
should be subjected to international control was 
not considered for a day. The scorn of Senhor da 
Silva, of the Bank of Portugal, was typical: it was 
at Lisbon, he said, and not on the shores of an 
Alpine lake, that the crisis would be solved. 

Meanwhile the Professor of Political Economy 
at Coimbra had been attracting some attention 
with a series of articles on the financial situation 
in the Catholic newspaper As Novidades. When 
the Geneva loan had been rejected, Carmona 
turned again to this man. His name was Dr. 
Antonio de Oliveira Salazar. He had had some 
previous experience of politics, and at first when 
approached he refused to take office. Eventually 
he yielded, in response to an appeal to his sense 
of patriotic duty; but he only yielded on condition 
of being given absolute discretion, absolute power 
in his own sphere. If he was to be Minister of 
Finance, it was essential that he should be com- 
pletely independent of any interested influence. 

On April 27, 1928, he entered that Ministry for 
the second time. "I thank you/ 1 he said, address- 



50 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

Ing General Vicente de Freltas, the Premier, at a 
meeting of the Cabinet on that date, "for having 
decided, after discussion with the Cabinet, to en- 
trust to me the portfolio of Finance, and also for 
the kind words which you have addressed to me. 
You must not thank me for having accepted this 
responsibility, for it represents to me a sacrifice so 
great that I would not make it for any man merely 
in friendship. I make it for my country, simply 
as a duty dictated by my conscience." He then 
proceeded to enumerate the conditions on which 
alone he undertook the Ministry; they were ac- 
cepted, and he holds that Ministry to this day, 
although he since assumed as well other and 
greater responsibilities. 

It is apparent, therefore, that Salazar is not a 
man who fought his way to power, and that he 
accepted office as the nominee of no party or fac- 
tion. He became a statesman reluctantly, and on 
his own terms. Always he longs for the academic 
quiet of his University at Coimbra: by disposition 
he is a scholar, and even a recluse. He is the 
homme d'etat malgre lui. Power is for him a 
heavy responsibility, an arduous public duty 
which he would greatly prefer to repudiate; he 
professes himself willing at all times to return to 
Coimbra should it be wished. But too much de- 
pends on him. Practically alone he has set Portu- 
gal on her feet again. He has completely, and 



THE MAN FROM NOWHERE 51 

incredibly, rehabilitated the national finances. It 
is always advisable to quote when making appar- 
ently wild statements, so we will quote The 
Times 10 to say that "it is impossible to deny that 
the economic improvement recorded in Portugal 
since 1928 is not only without parallel anywhere 
else in the world, but is an achievement for which 
history can show but few precedents." Moreover, 
there has been no repudiation of obligations, no 
artificial devices, no short cuts to solvency. The 
Portuguese budget has shown a substantial surplus 
every year since 1928, although ordinary expendi- 
ture has always been met from revenue, without 
recourse to loans. The national credit stands 
high in foreign markets; the external floating debt 
has been completely paid off; the Escudo has been 
stabilised; the internal price-level has long been 
steady; industry prospers, and extensive public 
works have been undertaken. Taxation, although 
mostly indirect, is high, but at least it is equitable, 
which was not the case before. The underlying 
principle in all this has been, and is, the subordi- 
nation of all things to the national interest. A 
multiplicity of superfluous but salaried offices has 
been swept away. Inaccessible in his room in the 
Finance Ministry, under obligation to no one and 
fearing none, Salazar has been the most relentless 
of administrators, and the most just. He is with- 
out doubt one of the greatest Finance Ministers 



52 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

of our time, and has been generally recognised as 
such by a world that Is less ready to approve his 
achievements In other directions. 

On July 5, 1932, he succeeded General Do- 
mingo de Olivelra as President of the Council of 
Ministers, and In this capacity he ,was chiefly re- 
sponsible for the Constitution of 1933, and for the 
Corporative organisation of the Portuguese Re- 
public that was then Initiated. In the Portugal of 
Salazar we have something that Is unique In Eu- 
rope. We have a Corporative State that Is un- 
tainted with any form of totalitarianism. Liberal 
Individualism has been superseded, but freedom 
remains. 

And the debt of Portugal to Salazar Is the 
greater when it Is remembered that had it not 
been for him Portugal to-day would almost un- 
doubtedly be a Soviet Republic; that is, Portugal 
to-day would be dead. Had the military rising of 
1926 effected nothing more than a temporary or- 
der, had Salazar not come from obscurity like Cin- 
cinnatus or St. Joan of Arc to save his country, to 
arrest the national drift, then the first Soviet of- 
fensive in Western Europe would have come quite 
certainly from both sides of the Iberian Peninsula 
simultaneously; the subjection of Spain would 
have been relentless and brief, and Europe might 
well by to-day have been In flames. That is con- 
jecture; it may appear to be idle conjecture. But 



SALAZAR 53 

Europe, as well as Portugal, owes a great debt to 
Marshal da Costa, the man who in 1926 took the 
initiative; to General Carmona, the man who saw a 
vision; and to Olive Ira Salazar, the man who (the 
phrase Is that of Gonzague de Reynold) "carries 
his power as a Christian carries his Cross." 



m 

SALAZAR 

ANTONIO DE OLIVEIRA SALAZAR was born in 1889 
at Santa Comba Dao, a village in Upper Beira, 
between Colxnbra and VIzeu. His father kept a 
little Inn in the village; his mother was a peasant 
woman. Their son Is a Portuguese of the Portu- 
guese, schooled In a hard school, brought up in 
close contact with the realities of life and death, 
with daily knowledge of poverty and of Faith. 

He was educated at the seminary at VIzeu, 
where he later taught | and he received the minor 
orders there before he decided that he was not 
called to the priesthood. ( At the age of twenty-one 
he left for the University of Coimbra, where six 
years later, after a distinguished academic prog- 
ress, he was appointed to the chair of Political 
Economy. He held this chair for twelve years be- 
fore he was called to the service of the State. "A 
Professor he was/* says Gonzague de Reynold, 



54 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

"and a Professor he remains. He works at the 
affairs of State with the same rigorous method and 
the same objectivity that he brought to the prepa- 
ration of his lectures, of his books, and of his 
studies. He does nothing without careful con- 
sideration. He will not be hurried or disturbed; 
he shields himself from the importunate. Being 
at heart a shy man, he appears as little as possible 
in public. Deliberately he has earned the reputa- 
tion of being inaccessible. He does not cultivate 
popularity; he mistrusts it. Finally, he is fiercely 
independent, and withdraws the moment he per- 
ceives that anyone is seeking to override his judg- 
ment, to influence him, or to enlist his support. 
These are the characteristics of the intellectual." 1X 
He has remained always the student, the Pro- 
fessor of Economics; but he has remained also the 
peasant. To-day, when he guides the destinies of 
Portugal, he spends his leisure on the holding at 
Santa Comba Dao where he was born, travelling 
between there and the capital as an ordinary citi- 
zen, and hearing unrecognised the gossip of him- 
self in the train or street. He retains the frugality, 
the simplicity of needs, of the peasant. The room 
at the Ministry of Finance in which he works has 
thus been described by Antonio Ferro: "A nonde- 
script settee bearing a few cushions, a pile of dos- 
siers on a fragile table that seemed to be emulating 
the leaning tower of Pisa. Some shelves with books, 



SALAZAR 55 

and, if I remember rightly, only three adornments 
on the walls: the image of the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus, the famous sonnet of Plantin, *Le bonheur 
de ce Monde/ and the sympathetic portrait of an 
aged woman. In the centre of this humble room, 
Salazar's chair, with its back to the window, and 
his desk, on which are two or three sets of docu- 
ments which have just been examined, the work 
he has in hand. Salazar, who wears his overcoat 
while he works, to keep out the cold, is seated at 
the desk." 12 

As President of the Council and Minister of 
Finance, his salary decided by himself Is 5,000 
Escudos a month, or less than 550 a year; and he 
lives strictly within this figure, regulating his per- 
sonal affairs as meticulously as he regulates those 
of Portugal. The story is told of an occasion on 
which he broke a leg in a fall on the stairs at the 
Ministry, and the Injury, sustained in the course 
of his work, took some time to heal. It was pro- 
posed that the doctors' expenses should be met 
from public money. Salazar would not hear of it, 
and sold a field at Santa Comba Dao to meet the 
charge. 

He has remained always a poor man: he has re- 
mained also the man who had thought to become 
a priest. He is profoundly Catholic, and comes of 
a profoundly Catholic stock. "In some ways/' says 
Gonzague de Reynold, "he reminds me of Mgr. 



56 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

Ignace Seipel, Chancellor of Austria, and even o 
Cardinal Mercier." At the University of Coimbra 
he was the leading member of a little group en- 
gaged in studying social questions in the light of 
the encyclicals of Leo XIII, and of the work of the 
French Catholic sociologists, Le Play and de Mun 
and de la Tour du Pin. His politics have always 
been governed by Catholic principles. The great 
encyclical Quadragesima Anno of Pius XI was 
published in 1931, and it is easy to trace the influ- 
ence which it had on the new Portuguese Consti- 
tution upon which Salazar was at that time 
engaged, and which was promulgated two years 
later. 

As a young man at Coimbra, he was attracted 
by a movement preaching "Integralismo Lusi- 
tano," a nationalist movement influenced by and 
analogous to the Action Frangaise of Charles 
Maurras. He was interested in anything that gave 
promise of a national awakening, of a revival of 
the historic Latin and Christian Portugal, of a 
challenge to the existing social and political order, 
with its squabbling politicians and its down- 
trodden people. During the War he was con- 
cerned in the formation of the Catholic Centre 
Party, and wrote extensively on the need for re- 
form in its newspaper, As Novidades; but his par- 
ticular subject remained the study of economics 
and finance. 



SALAZAR 57 

In 192 1 he ventured for the first time into prac- 
tical politics, and was elected to Congress; but he 
sat only for a single day, returning at once to 
Coimbra in disgust, to meditate on the wickedness 
of party politics. From then until 1956 the sup- 
port which he gave to the Centre Party was intel- 
lectual alone. The story of his career may be 
continued in his own words. "I was and I am a 
simple Professor of Finance at the University of 
Coimbra. When the revolution of May 28th 
broke out, the military committee at Lisbon came 
to offer me the portfolio of Finance, having the 
quite false idea that to Professors such as me all 
things are known. I refused the invitation for 
that reason, knowing the distance that separates 
the intellectual from the man of action. But they 
insisted so much that in the end I went to Lisbon, 
and interviewed General Gomez da Costa at Ama- 
dora. I excused myself on grounds of sickness and 
left for Santa Comba Dao, where, a few days later, 
they came to seek me; and I then became Minister 
for five days. At the re-shuffling of the Ministry 
I returned to Coimbra, together with some friends 
from the University who had also formed part of 
the Government. After the attempts of Comman- 
dant Filomeno da Camara and General Sinel de 
Cordes, they remembered me again, and here I 
am. It was Duarte Pacheco, at present Minister 
of Public Works, who this time came to Coimbra 



5 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

to fetch me In the name of the Government. As 
you see, the Catholics have always been strangers 
to my political career, to these successive voyages 
to and from Lisbon/' 13 

That final sentence is important. Associated 
with the Catholic Centre Party, his accession to 
power had nothing to do with that association, 
When he came to power he diverted its activities 
into Catholic Action; he would have no more par- 
ties in Portugal. He will tolerate no cliques or 
factions of any kind whatsoever. A party in Por- 
tugal means not so much a way of approach to 
common problems as a gang, a camarilla, pursuing 
Its own ends, and engaged in perpetual struggle 
with other parties, to the exclusion of all else. 
Salazar is influenced by no sub-national interest, 
but is concerned solely in a work of integration, 
in a grand synthesis of all that is best In Portugal 
into a government that is genuinely Portuguese. 

He is profoundly Catholic: so is Portugal. He 
has done all in his power to preserve spiritual 
values against the rising tide of materialism. He 
has built up a New State, the Estado Novo, on a 
foundation of Christian moral principles. The 
Portuguese Pavilion at the Paris Exhibition must 
have made this clear to millions of visitors. A 
writer in the French Dominican journal Sept 14 
has described a visit to the Pavilion, and how he 
found there evidences of "un redressment &co- 



SALAZAR 59 

nomique, mals tout Impregne de spiritualisme." 
"One feels/ ' he continues, "that the Professor 
from the University of Goimbra is not merely 
'mindful of spiritual values/ and that still less is 
he influenced by the myths of Race, of State, or of 
Class; one knows that he is Christian through and 
through, and that he governs a Christian people/' 
He is profoundly Catholic. He has ended anti- 
clerical persecution in Portugal; he has suppressed 
Masonry, of which possibly the chief characteristic 
was hatred of the Church. But he has equally 
refused to countenance clericalism. As a youth at 
Vizeu he had received the minor orders; as a 
young man at Coimbra he shared a room with a 
young priest, Manuel Cerejeira, who became Car- 
dinal Patriarch of Lisbon about the same time as 
Salazar entered the service of the State. It might 
have been expected that the Government of Por- 
tugal would soon become (in the usual but offen- 
sive phrase) "priest-ridden/' But nothing of the 
kind has happened. Salazar has kept Church and 
State quite apart; in that he has shown himself 
supremely wise. So will the Church thrive best. 
"I was astonished/' says Gonzague de Reynold, 
"to find that the Estado Novo has so far done rela- 
tively little for the Church/' Yet should she suffer 
persecution in Portugal again, it will be said that 
she controlled the wealth and destinies of the 
country. Should the Estado Novo be challenged, 



60 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

it will be said that it was priest-ridden. It is prob- 
able (although I have not yet been able to confirm 
this) that the Government o Salazar has already 
been set down by the Liberals as a tyranny of the 
Romish Church. 



CHAPTER 



PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF THE 
CORPORATE STATE 



E Portuguese State is defined by Article V 
/ o the Constitution o March 1933, as " a 
unitary and corporative Republic, founded on the 
equality of its citizens before the law, on the free 
access of all classes to the benefits of civilisation, 
and on the participation of all the elements that 
make up the nation in the administrative life and 
in the enactment of its laws." The word "Cor- 
porative " means that the nation is regarded as an 
organic whole, and not as an accidental agglomera- 
tion of individuals; tjiat it 15 organised by means 
of "Corporations," or bodies representing the dif- 
ferent phases of its life; and that these Corpora- 
tions, together with the other associations that 
men may have formed for various purposes, since 
man is a social animal, are made the basis of the 
political and administrative life of the country. 
By Article XVI, 1 "It shall be the duty of the State 
to authorise, unless prevented by existing legisla- 
tion, all corporative organisations, for Intellectual, 

61 



62 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

social, and economic purposes, and to encourage 
and to assist in their formation." 

This corporative organisation has two aspects: 
the economic and social, and the political. It 
disciplines the national activity in a common har- 
mony of interests, providing machinery for secur- 
ing equal justice for all concerned therein; and, 
considered politically, it provides for the nation a 
form of government which can best be described 
as an organic democracy. Under both these aspects 
it lays emphasis on the Rights of Man (although 
in that matter it has masters other than the proph- 
ets of the French Revolution) ; but it lays equal 
emphasis on what are conceived to be the duties 
of man. 

In the present chapter the economic and social 
aspects of the Corporate State in Portugal will be 
discussed. The chief documents that will be con- 
sidered, as defining principles, are the Constitu- 
tion of March 1933, and a series of Decree-Laws 
dated September agrd of the same year. Of these 
latter, the first, known as the Statute of National 
Labour, which codifies what are taken to be the 
fundamental rights and duties of property, capital, 
and labour, and which defines the part to be 
played by the State in regulating the national 
economy, is very much the most important. This 
document is undoubtedly modelled on the Italian 
Charter of Labour of 1927; and the fact that there 



THE CORPORATE STATE 63 

are many, If superficial, points of similarity be- 
tween the Italian and Portuguese regimes makes 
It the more Important that the distinctions should 
be emphasized. That Is done in a later chapter: 
for the present, they can be summarised by saying 
that Fascism Is something Italian whereas the 
Estado Novo Is Portuguese, and that although 
Italy is a Corporate State, the corporatism of Ital- 
ian Fascism is (in the French phrase for which 
there is no adequate translation) a corporatisme 
d'etat, while Dr. Salazar has rejected etatisme In 
all Its forms. 

If it cannot be denied that Salazar owes a cer- 
tain debt to Mussolini, it is very apparent that his 
greatest debt is to the social teaching of the Catho- 
lic Church. In particular the encyclical Quadra- 
gesimo Anno, published in May 1931, will be 
found to have had a profound influence on the 
Constitution which was drawn up by Salazar for 
his country during the following eighteen months 
and approved by a national plebiscite on March 
19, 1933. This influence is so considerable that, 
purely as a matter of history, parallel phrases will 
be cited from the two documents. It is not pro- 
posed to make the papal encyclicals the sole cri- 
terion of excellence for the work of Salazar; the 
present brief study is not intended solely or even 
primarily for Catholics. But no account of him 



64 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

would be accurate that did not recognize the ex- 
tent to which his ideas are derived from Catholic 
teaching. 

After a consideration of the principles and 
theory that are embodied In the Portuguese Con- 
stitution and subsequent laws, we will proceed to 
a summary of what has already been achieved to- 
wards their realisation. 

Article VI of the Constitution runs as follows: 

"It is the duty of the State: 

(1) To promote the unity of the Nation, and 
to establish order according to law, by de- 
fining and enforcing the rights and guar- 
antees that derive from morals, equity, or 
law, for the benefit of the individual, the 
family, the local authority, and other cor- 
porate bodies, both public and private. 

(2) To co-ordinate, stimulate, and direct all 
social activities so that a just harmony of 
interests may prevail, taking account of the 
legitimate subordination of private inter- 
ests to the general well-being. 

(3) To strive for improvement in the condi- 
tion of the least favoured classes of society, 
and to prevent their standard of life from 
falling below the minimum necessary to 
human subsistence." 



THE CORPORATE STATE 65 

Here is a citation from the Constitution, with 
its primary reference to the moral law, and its 
primary concern for the poor, that cannot fail to 
recall the encyclicals. The function of the State is 
defined as "to co-ordinate, stimulate, and direct"; 
whereas Quadragesima Anno used the words ' 'di- 
recting, watching, stimulating, restraining, as cir- 
cumstances suggest and necessity demands/* 2 

The point is expanded in Article VII of the 
Statute of National Labour, and in Article XXXI 
of the Constitution, of which the text is as follows: 

"The State has the right and the obligation to 
supervise the co-ordination and control of eco- 
nomic and social life with the following objects: 

(1) To establish a proper balance in the popu- 
lation, the professions, occupations, capital, 
and labour. 

(2) To protect the national economy against 
agricultural, industrial, and commercial 
ventures of a parasitic nature, or of a char- 
acter incompatible with the higher inter- 
ests of human life. 

(3) To ensure the lowest prices and the highest 
wages that are consistent with the just 
remuneration of the other factors of pro- 
duction, by means of the Improvement of 
technique, public services, and the national 
credit. 



66 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

(4) To develop settlement In the national 
territories to protect emigrants, and regu- 
late emigration." 

And Article XXXIV: 

"The State shall encourage the formation and 
the development of the national corporate econ- 
omy. It shall guard carefully lest the elements 
which comprise it tend to establish among them- 
selves an unrestricted competition such as is con- 
trary to the just ends of society and of themselves, 
but that they rather are encouraged to collaborate 
with one another as members of the same collec- 
tivity." 

The function of the State as here defined corre- 
sponds exactly to that given to it by the Pope, who 
insists that "all the occupational groups (which 
make up a nation) should be fused into an har- 
monious unity, inspired by the principle of the 
common good. And the genuine and chief func- 
tion of public and civil authority consists precisely 
in the efficacious furthering of this harmony and 
co-ordination of all social forces." s 

It is further laid down by the Statute of Na- 
tional Labour that "the State should abjure all 
industrial or commercial exploitation, whether in 
the form of competition with private enterprises 
in the economic sphere, or in the form of mo- 



THE CORPORATE STATE 67 

nopoly, even if the result of such enterprises Is 
designed, wholly or In part, to be used for public 
services. It shall only be able to establish or carry 
on exploitations of this kind in exceptional cases, 
and to obtain social advantages superior to those 
which would be obtained otherwise. Similarly, 
the State cannot take a direct part in the admin- 
istration of private enterprises unless it is called 
upon to finance them In order to obtain such re- 
sults" (Article VI: cp. also the Constitution, Art. 
XXXIII) . "The State recognises in private ini- 
tiative the most fruitful instrument of progress 
and of national economy" (Article IV) . "The 
State recognises the right of ownership, and the 
powers of using and disposing of property that 
follow therefrom, as a rational necessity deduced 
from the nature of man, as leading to the greatest 
individual and collective effort in the family and 
in society, and as one of the first bases of social 
conservation and progress" (Article XII) . 

Private ownership Is a fundamental fact In the 
Portugal of Salazar. The right to own Is one of 
the chief of the rights of man as there conceived; 
it is defined as fundamental at the beginning 
of the Constitution, together with freedom of 
thought and of meeting and association, and other 
rights upon which Liberal constitutions lay ex- 
clusive emphasis (Article VIII, 15; see note 5, 
p. 157, below) . It is a right that has been denied 



68 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

equally by Capitalism and by Socialism, which is 
the logical conclusion of Capitalism. Capitalism 
means the concentration of ownership in the 
hands of a few,, and therefore denies men the natu- 
ral right of ownership; Socialism seeks to remedy 
the state of affairs so produced by withdrawing 
ownership even from the few. Salazar would re- 
store ownership to many. 

It is a necessary principle; and, Salazar has said, 
"If we are obsessed exclusively by the idea of 
wealth, of production, we cannot be either for or 
against the large or the small owner: we must 
favour the one here and the other there, accord- 
ing to geographical, climatic, and economic condi- 
tions. But and this is my point if we do not 
reduce the life of society to terms of the produc- 
tion and the utilisation of wealth; if we find that 
that aspect of life, however necessary, should be 
tempered, completed or corrected by other reali- 
tiessuch as tranquillity, happiness, well-being, 
and the beauty of family life then we can laugh 
at the cut-and-dried formulas for higher produc- 
tivity, and decide at once for a policy of breaking 
up the great rural estates, and of systematically 
making small-holdings in which peasant families 
can be established in their ownership. 

"Such a policy is an essential part of my ideas; 
but it conflicts, on the other hand, with the princi- 
ples of those who materialise life, and regard man, 



THE CORPORATE STATE 

as do the Russians, as a machine for producing 
and consuming wealth. So you see that the proper 
interest of States, and above all of the so-called 
Capitalist States, is to create the largest possible 
number of small proprietors, who, far from assist- 
ing communism and socialism, will become a solid 
conservative foundation for the Nation, and will 
oppose to the last all libertarian ideas/' 4 

Salazar goes on to describe what steps have been 
taken and are being taken to carry out this policy 
of encouraging the small proprietor; let it be 
noted that they do not include expropriation of 
the rich. Three-fifths of the Portuguese are en- 
gaged in agricultural work, and this large-scale 
policy in favour of small farmers at once charac- 
terizes the new regime. It is popular. If the Eng- 
lish reader finds it difficult to understand unless it 
is assimilated to some -ism that is known to him, it 
is much more nearly true to say of the Portugal of 
Salazar that it is a Distributist State than to say 
that it is Fascist. But it is better to keep -isms out 
of the matter altogether, more especially as so 
many, just as they associate Fascism vaguely with 
castor-oil and concentration-camps, think only of 
Distributism if they think of it at all in connec- 
tion with beer and the cult of the homespun. 

The work that has been done in Portugal to- 
wards the creation of an independent and owning 
peasantry will be referred to in the fourth section 



yo THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

of this chapter. But It Is not only In agriculture 
that the small man is encouraged and protected. 
In pursuance of its duty of "co-ordinating, stimu- 
lating, and directing/' the State, by Article 
XXXII of the Constitution, must "encourage 
those private economic activities which are most 
profitable in proportion to their costs, but with- 
out prejudice to the social benefit conferred by 
small home Industries, or to the protection which 
is due to them/' It is rarely that "the social bene- 
fit conferred by small home industries" has re- 
ceived constitutional recognition. 

The whole of Section III of the first part of the 
Constitution concerns the position of the Family 
In the Estado Novo. Article XII enumerates the 
claims of the family to the protection of the State: 
"The State shall ensure the constitution and pro- 
tection of the family, as the source of preservation 
and development of the race, as the first basis of 
education and of social discipline and harmony, 
and as a fundamental of political and administra- 
tive order, by its association in the parish (jre- 
guesia) and in the municipality, as well as by Its 
representation In the local authorities governing 
these." That is, the moral Importance of the in- 
stitution of the family is recognised equally as its 
merely physiological importance as "the source of 
the preservation and development of the race." 
It is "the first basis of education and of social dis- 



THE CORPORATE STATE 71 

cipllne and harmony." "To our knowledge/' says 
Senhor Pereira dos Santos, In his exhaustive trea- 
tise on the Portuguese Constitution, "there is no 
other constitutional text on the role of the family 
in the State that is so comprehensive as this. . . . 
Generally, it is only its physiological function that 
is cited as the sole reason that justifies the protec- 
tion of the family by the public authority/' G He 
refers those who doubt to no less than six modern 
constitutions; but he was writing, of course, be- 
fore the publication of the remarkable new Con- 
stitution of Eire. 6 

Article XIV of the Portuguese Constitution is 
this: 

"With the object of protecting the Family, it ap- 
pertains to the State and to local authorities: 

(i) To encourage the establishment of sepa- 
rate homes under healthy conditions, and 
the institution of the family household. 

(s) To protect maternity. 

(3) To establish taxation in accordance with 
the legitimate expenses of the family, and 
to promote the adoption of the family 
wage. 

(4) To assist parents in the discharge of their 
duty of instructing and educating their 
children and to co-operate with them by 



72 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

means of public institutions for education 
and correction, or by encouraging private 
establishments destined for the same pur- 
pose. 

(5) To take all effective precautions to guard 
against the corruption of morals." 

The third and fourth clauses here seem of par- 
ticular significance. The family wage is but an 
extension of the principle of the living wage. 
"Remuneration ought not to be insufficient to 
support a frugal and well-behaved wage-earner/' 
says Rerum Novarum. "There is, by principle, a 
minimum of wage or salary which corresponds 
to the needs of existence/' says the Portuguese 
Statute of National Labour. But to define con- 
stitutionally that taxation must consider pre-emi- 
nently the necessity of providing the family with 
adequate means of subsistence is an excellent ap- 
plication of the principle that the State exists for 
society, and not society for the State. 

The fourth clause of the above article, however, 
is the most remarkable. The family, and not the 
State-owned and compulsory school, is the natural 
milieu of the child. The first right of parents is 
the right of caring for their own children, and it 
is a right which in Portugal is recognised. In Eng- 
land it is increasingly denied. Elementary and 
secondary schools, and technical colleges, are 



THE CORPORATE STATE 73 

maintained in Portugal by the State, and every 
child is bound to receive at least an elementary 
education. But every parent is free to decide 
whether his child shall receive that education at 
home, in a private school, or in a State school; and 
the home is considered to be the normal place. 
Freedom of education is another of those liberties 
guaranteed by the Constitution under Article 
VIII; and it is a liberty which in England is not 
enjoyed. 

"The State/' says Salazar, "is not in Portugal 
the chief educator; the educative function lies pri- 
marily with the family, with which the State col- 
laborates, only substituting itself when the family 
does not exist, or when it is unable to undertake 
its proper function/' 

The family, then, is the primary social unit 
and, moreover, the independent, oiuning, family. 
We will again sum the matter up in the words of 
Salazar. "The family which dwells beneath its 
own roof is necessarily more thrifty, more stable, 
better constituted. That is why great blocks of 
flats, colossal houses for the workers, with their 
adjoining restaurants and their common table, do 
not interest us. All that is all right for the chance 
encounters of life, for the already semi-nomadic 
populations of our great contemporary civilisa- 
tion; for our independent nature and simpler 



74 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

tastes, we prefer the small independent house, In- 
habited by the family which owns it/' 7 



ii 



Two important points must be seized from the 
foregoing brief summary of Salazar's conception 
of society and of the functions and position of the 
State. The first characterises his work through- 
out: it is his constant and primary deference to 
the natural and moral law, and his basic accept- 
ance of Christian concepts of the nature of man 
and of society. It is made abundantly clear in his 
speeches. " Apart altogether from the intrinsic 
value of religious truth to the individual and soci- 
ety, we have need of an absolute; and we are not 
going to create that which exists outside and above 
us with our own hands. We are not going to arro- 
gate to the State the function of decreeing belief, 
of defining the principles of moral law. We are 
led, therefore, to consider Power as morally lim- 
ited, and we have sought to avoid the error or the 
crime of deifying the State, or Force, or Riches, or 
Beauty, or Vice we do not challenge God." 8 

It is the moral law which is first acknowledged 
by the Portuguese Constitution. 9 Man's right to 
own property is "deduced from the nature of 
man/* as St. Thomas Aquinas deduced it. It is so 
throughout the legal documents which embody 



THE CORPORATE STATE 75 

the principles of the Estada Novo. The work of 
Salazar has been to achieve a Christian and tra- 
ditionalist re-awakening. "Certes, il y a d'abord 
un but economique," writes Gonzague de Rey- 
nold, "puis un but social, puis un but national; 
mais, plus haut, au fond de F avenue, comme la 
statue ou aboutissent toutes les lignes de la per- 
spective, II y a le but moral. Le regime corpora- 
tiste est nettement spiritualiste." 

The second point, which must be emphasised 
before we proceed to discuss the practical details 
of the Portuguese Corporate State, is that it is to 
be so far as is possible a spontaneous development. 
The duty of the State, as has already been said, is 
to "encourage'': to "co-ordinate, stimulate, and 
direct" the corporative organisation; it is not the 
duty of the State itself to create, or to impose from 
above. In the words of Article XVI of the Con- 
stitution, which we have already quoted (p. 61) , 
the State must "authorise": that is, it does not 
normally take the first step. Its role consists es- 
sentially in making good the shortcomings of 
spontaneous initiative, of complementing individ- 
ual effort. This function has never been ex- 
ceeded; if it be thought that at times rather a large 
degree of State assistance has been required to 
complement individual effort, it should be re- 
membered what manner of people are the Portu- 
guese. 



76 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

They will never do to-day what can possibly be 
done to-morrow: it is manana, manana^ as with 
the Spanish. They are a strange, sad, melancholy 
people, characterised by the saudade, the feeling 
that their days of greatness are past, that they have 
fallen and cannot get up again, that there is noth- 
ing for it but to sing and to wait for to-morrow, 
manana, when they will be great again. But it is 
always manana. 

It is an indolence inherited of centuries against 
which the Government of Salazar has to work. 
Nevertheless, the State has reduced its own ob~ 
trusiveness to a minimum. It has abjured bureau- 
cracy. The fifth clause of Article VII of the 
Statute of National Labour says: "The State shall 
reduce to the indispensable minimum the sphere 
of action of its officials in the national economy/' 
Again, the preamble to the Decree-Law of July 8, 
1936, declares that the Corporate State can only 
live if it is administered through organs as far as 
possible removed from the Portuguese equivalent 
of Whitehall, and as nearly as possible in contact 
with the different members of the corporate body; 
and it goes on to provide for the institution by the 
Minister of Commerce and Industry, of bodies 
4 'designed to co-ordinate, and, in the last resort, to 
regulate economic and social life in those profes- 
sions which are directly concerned in export and 
import": that is, to supervise and ensure that "just 



THE CORPORATE STATE 77 

harmony of Interests 17 and the "legitimtae subor- 
dination of private Interest to the general well- 
being" of which the Constitution speaks. "These 
bodies/' says Fr. Muller, the distinguished Belgian 
student of corporative theory, "will serve both as 
instruments for the exercise of State supervision 
and as a means of giving to the Corporations a 
degree of autonomy. Their composition is de- 
signed to bring the representatives of the State 
and of the interests concerned into direct collabo- 
ration. It is a new idea, not to be paralleled in 
any other corporative regime, and illustrates the 
desire of the Portuguese 'dictatorship' to reduce 
State intervention to a minimum, and, even in 
the exercise of the most necessary control, to leave 
as much as Is possible to private initiative/' 10 

The ultimate ideal is that the Corporations 
representing the various Industrial and commer- 
cial activities of the nation shall be entirely au- 
tonomous. "The State," writes Salazar, "refrains 
from itself directing the Corporation, and only re- 
serves for itself the rightwhich it regards as a 
duty of ensuring that the law is carried out, and 
that the interests of the community are protected. 
To go further would, In its opinion, not only be 
to complicate the task of government, but to prej- 
udice social life/' Z1 

This is a fact of the utmost Importance, and is 
one of the chief reasons why the corporatism of 



78 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

Portugal is essentially different from Italian Fas- 
cism. Pius XI, after briefly recapitulating Fascist 
theory, writes: "Little reflection is required to 
perceive the advantages of the institution thus 
summarily described . . . but . . . there are 
some who fear that the State is substituting itself 
in the place of private initiative, instead of limit- 
ing itself to necessary and sufficient assistance. It 
is feared that the new syndical and corporative 
organisation tends to have an excessively bureau- 
cratic and political character." 12 This is the chief 
criticism which, in 1931, he had to make of the 
Corporate State of Italy. It does not apply to the 
Corporate State of Portugal. 

The Corporate State is a misleading term; it 
would be better to refer to the Corporate Nation. 
There is no etatisme in Portugal; and Salazar has 
repeatedly declared that there shall not be. "Dur- 
ing long conversations which I had the honour to 
have with Senhor Teotonio Pereira, then Under- 
secretary of State for the Corporations, and with 
Salazar himself," again to quote Gonzague de 
Reynold, "both continually emphasised their 
strong opposition to etatisme. That for which 
they wish, that for which they are working is a 
corporatisme d association, and not a corporatisme 
d'etat!* 1S 

The Portuguese Corporate State is growing 
organically, like a plant; it is being tended from 



THE CORPORATE STATE 79 

above, but the seed from which It springs Is deep 
In the soil of Portugal. The historic Guild system 
survived in Portugal in a very real form until the 
nineteenth century, and was only finally sup- 
pressed, In the name of Liberalism, by a decree of 
May 7, 1834. A political invasion accompanied 
the Napoleonic invasion of Portugal: what Salazar 
has described as the "alien and exotic plant" of 
Liberalism was obtruded on a country exhausted 
by thirty years of Invasion and civil war. During 
the remainder of the nineteenth century Portugal 
was dominated by alien influences, and exploited 
to the full by English and German capital. But 
the true and historic Portugal was not dead, even 
if trampled underfoot; and as the century wore 
on, and confusion became steadily worse con- 
founded, she began to re-assert herself. The old 
Corporative ideal found more and more adherents 
as the effects of political and economic Liberalism 
made themselves apparent; and it received great 
stimulus towards the end of the century from the 
publication of the great social encyclical of 
Leo XIII, Rerum Novarum. By the side of this 
revival of the ancient theory of economic organisa- 
tion caine a strong movement for political nation- 
alism. We have seen how Salazar as a young man 
was associated with these tendencies. His work in 
restoring the corporative system to Portugal, seen 
in its historical perspective, becomes but a vindi- 



8o THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

cation of the historic Portugal. He has ended the 
long period of alien domination. 

It would be absurd to pretend that the ancient 
Guild system had not outlived its usefulness in 
1834, just as it would be absurd to press too far 
the analogy between the ancient Guild and the 
modern Corporation. But what I have written 
remains true: Salazar has restored Portugal to her- 
self. He has realised a spontaneous and natural 
movement. That is partly what is meant by say- 
ing that the corporatism of the Estado Novo is a 
corporatisme d' association. What also is meant is 
that the corporate organisation Is not imposed 
from above, but encouraged to develop from be- 
low, from the people, from the Nation. 

It possesses a degree of adaptability, of supple- 
ness, which will be made clear as this discussion of 
it proceeds, and which Is one of its chief strengths. 
It is not a system so much as a principle: the or- 
ganisation of the nation is being modified to suit 
particular circumstances, shaped to local condi- 
tions. It Is growing organically. 

"Although we have not yet completely consti- 
tuted a single Corporation/' wrote Salazar in 1936, 
"the corporative spirit is beginning to penetrate 
the national economy, and that is essential for the 
success of the regime. Sometimes we have to 
make experiments with pre-corporative bodies 
before envisaging typically corporative organisa- 



THE CORPORATE STATE 8l 

tion, to open the way, as it were, rather than run 
the risk of compromising an ideal by lack of 
preparation." 14 To M. de Reynold he said: "It is 
essential to go slowly in organising the Corpora- 
tions, for it is first and foremost necessary to de- 
velop the corporative spirit, without which the 
Corporations must risk degenerating, either into 
a system of trusts, or into one of State bureaucracy. 
For the present, the State is forced into continual 
intervention, because it is coming into continual 
conflict with individualist opposition and with 
Portuguese apathy. We do not wish to introduce 
corporatism everywhere all at once, we are pro- 
ceeding as we can, beginning at the beginning, 
and taking account of local circumstances/' 15 

"One cannot but be astonished," writes Fr. 
Muller, "in studying the new corporative regime 
of Portugal, by the remarkable restraint shown in 
the legislative documents which are bringing it 
into being. The third section of the Statute of 
National Labour, devoted to the corporative or- 
ganisation, is all contained in ten articles; the 
decree concerning the gremios, or employers' 
associations, has no more; the decree concerning 
the national syndicates is all compressed into 
twenty-five articles. The constitution and ad- 
ministration of the syndicates have alone been 
treated in some detail. We have scarcely any in- 
formation about the organisation and internal 



82 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

administration of the employers' associations, and 
we know nothing at all about the Federations en- 
visaged as intermediary in the corporative struc- 
ture. On the Corporations themselves the Statute 
of National Labour provides only some very 
general principles. 

"A bewildering brevity indeed, and a change 
from the cut-and-dried systems to which certain 
enthusiasts for the corporative idea have accus- 
tomed us. Such people like to display before our 
eyes the pieces of an ingenious mechanism which 
they have invented, to describe the unfailing pre- 
cision of its various parts, to expatiate on the exact 
working and the precise balance of its strictly 
ordered organisations, apparently without being 
aware that society is organic, that life does not 
permit of prescribed rules for its development. 
Corporative organisation is not assembled like a 
machine; it is born, it grows and flourishes from 
the impulse of internal and spontaneous forces 
which the legislator can certainly 'direct, watch, 
stimulate, restrain/ but on which it is useless for 
him to attempt to impose his will." 16 

Salazar is never afraid or reluctant to admit 
mistakes, to modify, to go back, to abandon any 
scheme which in practice proves unsatisfactory. 
But he will never abandon the fundamental prin- 
ciples to which in his speeches and writings he 
constantly returns. Perhaps one of the most im- 



THE CORPORATE STATE 83 

portant things about the Portuguese Corporate 
State Is that It is still frankly experimental; and 
perhaps one of the most important things about 
Salazar is his dictum that "the State represents a 
doctrine in action." When first he took office he 
said: "1 know exactly what I want and where I am 
going." He has proved that to be true. Even the 
Constitution of Portugal contains ample provision 
for revision. But in the fundamental principles 
on which the work of national reconstruction is 
based there can be no revision. 

First among these principles is that Portugal 
shall be Portugal. For a century she has suffered 
the encroachments of English and German finan- 
cial and commercial interests, and of French po- 
litical and intellectual influences: the francezismo* 
We have made a general comparison between the 
Portuguese people and the Irish; and both in 
Portugal and in Ireland have the years since the 
Great War seen a revolt against alien domination, 
and the acceptance by the people of new Constitu- 
tions inspired by Christian principles equally as 
by a spirit of national pride. 

ni 

"We have distorted the idea of wealth; we have 
divorced it from its object, which is to serve 
worthily the life of man. We have put it into a 



84 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

separate category, apart from the Interests of the 
community and apart from moral concepts; and 
we have imagined that the destiny of individuals, 
of States, and of nations, is to accumulate goods 
without regard for social utility, without regard 
for justice in their acquisition or their use. 

"We have distorted the idea of honour, and we 
have forgotten the personality of the labourer, his 
dignity as a human being; we have thought only 
of his value as a producing machine, we have 
measured or weighed his productive power and 
we have not so much as remembered that he is a 
member of a family, that life is not in him alone, 
but in his wife, his children, and his home. 

"We have gone further; we have dispersed his 
home. We have called forth the woman and the 
child as factors in production, less efficient but 
cheaper as detached units, elements entirely in- 
dependent of one another, without bonds, without 
affection, without a life in common; in fact, we 
have destroyed the family. At one stroke, we have 
broken into the family circle; and, having in- 
creased competition amongst the workers by in- 
troducing the labour of women, we have not 
accorded to each family in salaries the value of the 
industry of a good housewife, of the social useful- 
ness of the mother of a family. 

"We detached the worker from the natural sur- 
roundings of his profession: free from the bonds 



THE CORPORATE STATE 85 

of association, he remained alone; without the dis- 
cipline of the association, he became free, but de- 
fenceless. Next we allowed him to ally himself 
with others and he did so, by reaction, not In order 
to achieve unity, not with the aim of helping to 
co-ordinate all the various factors in the work of 
the production of wealth, but in opposition to 
someone or something In opposition to the State, 
which is the guardian of order, in opposition to 
his employers, whom he regarded as a hostile class, 
even in opposition to other workers. . . . No ob- 
jects of Intellectual or moral advancement, or of 
the improvement of professional technique, or of 
insurance or provident work; no spirit of co-opera- 
tionnothing but hate, destructive hate. 

"We forced the State, at first, into an absolute 
passivity, unconcerned, whether willingly or not, 
in the organisation of the national economy; and 
then Into an all-absorbing intervention, which 
regulated the production, the consumption, and 
the distribution of wealth. . . . Those who, 
blindly driven by the logic of their false princi- 
ples, have carried this to its conclusion, have 
mounted the machine with a great show of system, 
with the apparent Infallibility of science and ad- 
vanced technique; but the free worker, the MAN, 
has disappeared, caught up in the colossal mecha- 
nism that is without mercy and without mind. 
We have seen the workers mobilised like ma- 



86 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

chines, shifted like cattle when the pasture 
fails." 17 

That is an indictment by Salazar of the Liberal 
inheritance. Society was disintegrated by Liberal- 
ism; Salazar seeks a solution by synthesis, by re- 
construction, instead of by regimentation. He 
seeks to restore to society the groupings which are 
natural to man. A man lives first in his family, 
secondly in his trade. The family is to be pro- 
tected and preserved. And men who work in 
different ways will form different professional as- 
sociations, not so much for defence of their pro- 
fessional interests as to make possible their 
collaboration in the life of the community; and 
not more for that than for such purposes as the 
development of professional technique, the pur- 
suance of common ideals, the protection of their 
fellows in times of adversity and misfortune. Em- 
ployers will have their associations, and workers 
theirs. Wider organisations will co-ordinate into 
a Corporation all concerned in a given branch of 
activity; and the various Corporations will be co- 
ordinated in a Corporative Chamber, in which 
also national problems and public affairs will be 
discussed by those with particular knowledge of 
them. 

"It is natural that just as those who dwell in 
close proximity constitute townships, so those who 
practise the same trade or profession, in the eco- 



THE CORPORATE STATE 87 

nomlc field or any other, form corporate groups/' 
"In these corporations the common Interests of 
the whole vocational group must predominate; 
and among these Interests the most Important is to 
promote as much as possible the contribution of 
each trade or profession to the common good." 1S 
These words might well be those of Salazar, but 
they are not. 

The Corporations represent no more than the 
different occupations in which men are engaged, 
organised so that they may adequately collaborate 
with the State In promoting the national well- 
being. For the Corporations are the component 
parts of the nation, considered functionally; and, 
since the nation is an entity, an organic whole, the 
interests of its component parts are ultimately 
identical with the national Interest. 

Each Corporation, each occupational group, is 
responsible for its own corporate life, as were the 
Medieval Guilds. It must protect all those en- 
gaged in the branch of activity with which it is 
concerned; it must see that they are adequately 
rewarded for their work, It must defend their 
rights, it must provide for them in times of mis- 
fortune. 

It is, as we have already said, misleading to press 
the analogy with the medieval Guild system too 
far, but there is this in common: that society is 
regarded as being divided, as it were, vertically, 



88 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

according to trade or profession or occupation, in- 
stead of horizontally according to social status or 
(what is worse) according to income. It is an 
elementary principle that all idea of the class-war 
is to be repudiated. "The hierarchy of functions 
and social interests is an essential condition of the 
national economy/' 19 says the Statute of National 
Labour; and it should be seen at once that that is 
not inconsistent with the vertical division of soci- 
ety. So far as the Portuguese State is concerned, 
there are not upper, middle, and lower classes; but 
there are men concerned in the cork industry, 
men concerned in the wine industry, and so on. 
In each industry "the hierarchy of functions" 
must remain; there will be authority and obedi- 
ence, but not absolute authority and wage-slavery. 
Strikes and lock-outs and all such methods of class 
defence are specifically declared illegal both by the 
Constitution and by the Statute of National La- 
bour. 20 There are associations alike of employers 
and employed; but the first purpose of these is not 
to defend the interests of a class, but to collaborate 
in the interests of the community. That is why it 
is misleading to refer to the workers' associations 
as "Trade Unions/' with its implication of mo- 
tives of defence; the word "syndicate'' is also mis- 
leading, as it has different associations in different 
places; but the Portuguese use it, so we must do 
the same. 



THE CORPORATE STATE 89 

The Portuguese national syndicates, according 
to Article IX of the Decree-Law which governs 
them, "should subordinate their own Interests to 
the Interests of the national economy, in collabora- 
tion with the State and with the higher organs of 
production and of labour." The key principle in 
all corporative theory Is the principle of the com- 
mon good. 

The national syndicates group together the em- 
ployees and wage-earners In a given industry; and 
their formation has from the start been left freely 
to the initiative of those concerned, although they 
must secure Government recognition, and, of 
course, not more than one syndicate will be rec- 
ognised for each industry in the same neighbour- 
hood. Their statutes, to receive approval and 
recognition, must expressly repudiate the class 
struggle, and declare readiness to co-operate with 
the other factors In the national economy. They 
do not vary much: the interests of the working- 
man are very much the same In all places. What- 
ever his trade and wherever he lives, he requires 
reasonable hours, reasonable conditions of work, 
an adequate wage, good housing, and so on. Con- 
sequently, the terms of the law governing the 
syndicates are much more precise than Is possible 
for those concerning the employers* associations, 
which vary considerably. 

Decree-Law No. 23,050 of September 23, 1933, 



go THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

lays down that ordinarily no syndicate containing 
fewer than a hundred members will be recognised; 
that not more than one syndicate for each trade 
may be formed in each district; * that the capital 
town of the district will normally be its headquar- 
ters; that membership will not be compulsory, but 
that juridical personality will be granted to the 
syndicates, which will legally represent all work- 
ers in its industry and district, whether members 
or not. Rules governing their organisation are 
also given. Part of the function of the syndicates 
is to negotiate collective labour contracts with the 
employers' associations; but they are also essen- 
tially concerned with the welfare of their mem- 
bers. Article XII imposes on them the obligation 
to set up syndical providential societies, to organ- 
ise agencies for finding employment for workers 
in the trade with which they are concerned, and to 
establish and maintain schools for professional 
and technical instruction; and "some syndicates 
have built schools for their members* children, 
sanatoria and creches, provided medical aid and 
medicines, and obtained good and cheap houses, 
out of those built by the State, for their members. 
Subsidies in sickness and unemployment have 
been provided. Technical classes, language 
courses, and general educational lectures have 

* The "District" Distrito is a Portuguese administrative area 
corresponding, roughly, to the English county. 



THE CORPORATE STATE Ql 

been given. . . . Many public meetings have been 
held, which have enabled employers and workers 
to meet in a friendly atmosphere/' 21 

The employers' associations are known as gre- 
mios, and are practically all governed by Decree- 
Law No. 23,049, ia also of September 23, 1933- 
According to this law, the gremios are to be cre- 
ated by ministerial initiative; and we are con- 
fronted with what appears to be a species o 
corporatisme d'etat. The greatest merit of this 
law is its elasticity; no uniform regulations are 
provided for the gremios, but each is to be adapted 
to the particular conditions of the industry with 
which it is concerned. And just as it is essential 
that particular circumstances should be allowed to 
modify and to vary the application of an ideal, so 
it must be remembered that immediate but tem- 
porary necessities must frequently compel devia- 
tion from what is in theory best. The apparent 
corporatisme d'etat of the first law dealing with 
the employers* associations was partly a result of 
the conditidns prevailing in the anarchy of the 
years before 1926, but, even more, it was a neces- 
sary result of that international disaster techni- 
cally known as a "crisis/' or "slump," which hit 
the world soon after Salazar began his work. 

Before the promulgation of the Constitution, 
some branches of production had actually ap- 
pealed to the Government for some sort of organi- 



92 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

sation. In the sardine Industry, for Instance, which 
Is one of the most Important in Portugal, markets 
were being lost to foreign competition and honest 
firms were being hopelessly undercut by unscru- 
pulous exporters of tins full of cheap but rancid 
fish. The victimised firms appealed to the Gov- 
ernment, and Salazar, then only Minister of 
Finance (1931) , carried out a thorough study of 
the industry and Its problem, and Issued a report. 
On the recommendation of this report, the pro- 
duction and export of sardines were strictly regu- 
lated, and a "Consortium of Sardine Canners" was 
created, of which membership was compulsory. 
This piece of State Interference saved an ex- 
tremely Important industry from ruin at the hands 
of foreign and unscrupulous competitors. Simi- 
larly, order was Introduced into the port wine 
industry by compelling the co-operation of all 
producers. The organisations then set up were 
"pre-corporative" in type, and have since been re- 
vised as the Corporate State develops. 22 

When the legislation of 1933 extended order 
and co-ordination to all forms of national activity, 
It Is not, then, surprising to find that production 
was at first organised by the Government, to 
which production had itself appealed. But very 
soon we find a striking proof of the desire of the 
Government for a true corporatisme d' association, 
In the preamble to a second important Decree- 



THE CORPORATE STATE 93 

Law about the gremios, that o December 3, 1934. 
This defends the previous law on grounds of 
necessity; and continues: "The organisation of 
employers, while conforming to the objects pre- 
scribed for It and the duties Imposed upon It by 
corporative law, ought not normally to proceed 
from Government Initiative, nor attempt compul- 
sorily to Include all enterprises. It will arise from 
the Initiative of those who are themselves inter- 
ested, who will have to furnish their own effort, 
assume their own responsibilities, study the prob- 
lems which concern them most nearly, and enter 
Into the role which falls to them under the cor- 
porate organisation." 

This Is more in keeping with the rest of Sala- 
zar's legislation. Groups that are optional and 
formed by, Instead of compulsory and Imposed on, 
the employers of labour, are now recognized by 
the Government. The only condition made is the 
necessary one that they shall include at least half 
of all those engaged In the industry In question, 
and shall represent at least half of the financial 
interest involved. Otherwise rival associations 
might spring up in competition, or minorities 
might secure recognition, and there would not be 
any true participation of that Industry In the cor- 
porative structure. Such associations will receive 
full recognition; that is, they will be accorded 
juridical personality, and will legally represent all 



94 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

employers In the Industry and district of their 
competence; and conditions of labour agreed 
upon by them in meetings with representatives of 
the workers' syndicates will be similarly binding 
on all, whether members or no. Steps taken by 
them for the benefit of the Industry with which 
they are concerned shall be binding on all when 
sanctioned by the Government on the recommen- 
dation of the Corporative Council. 

'Tar Forlentation nouvelle qu'il vient de don- 
ner a sa politique corporative, le Gouvernement 
portugais adhere a la formule d'auto-dlscipllne, en 
quo! nous voyons Fexpresslon la plus sincere de 
1'idee corporative/' comments Fr. Muller. "De 
grand coeur nous applaudissons a cette innovation, 
dont nous attendons, pour le progres de Torganisa- 
tion professionnelle au Portugal, les plus heureux 
resultats." 23 

It is perhaps misleading to refer to the gremios 
as "employers' associations," since they are group- 
ings by function: a man belongs to a gremio as 
being a producer, a contributor to the national 
wealth, rather than as being an employer of la- 
bour. Nevertheless, an essential purpose of the 
syndicates and the gremios is that they should 
meet together to draw up collective labour con- 
tracts, and to ensure good relations between em- 
ployers and employed. Disputes or differences 
arising out of such collective bargaining come 



THE CORPORATE STATE 95 

before Independent tribunals, under the admin- 
istrative authority of the National Institute of 
Labour and Social Welfare, against the decisions 
of which appeals may be made, on points of law, 
to the Supreme Council of Public Administra- 



tion. 24 



Both national syndicates and gremios have a 
consultative function, and must furnish advice 
and information on matters of their competence 
when required. They have also a political func- 
tion, which will be referred to In the following 
chapter. 

The syndicates and gremios concerned In dif- 
ferent parts of the country In the same industry 
are grouped into regional or national "Federa- 
tions," and Federations concerned with allied In- 
dustries or pursuits are further co-ordinated In 
"Unions." And all these various groupings are 
finally to be Integrated Into Corporations. ' 'Be- 
ing representative of the general interests of pro- 
duction, the Corporations can establish among 
themselves general and binding rules dealing with 
their internal discipline and the co-ordination of 
activities, always providing that they shall have 
received the necessary powers from the syndicates 
or gremios, Unions or Federations, which com- 
prise them, as well as the authorisation of the 
State." (Statute of National Labour: Art. 
XLIII.) It Is important to remember that the 



96 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

Corporations are to be so far as possible autono- 
mous, and that authority Is to travel upwards, as 
it were, from the bottom, instead of downwards 
from the top. The Corporations came last into 
being: they represent the final work of Integra- 
tion. Let this be remembered by those who at- 
tempt too hasty a comparison with Italian Fascism. 

The purposes of the Corporation, as of the syn- 
dicates and other corporate bodies, are not merely 
economic; any more than the purpose of the 
medieval Guild was merely economic. But they 
go further than did the Guilds in having a poli- 
tical function. The Corporative bodies take part 
In the election of the Municipal Chambers, the 
Provincial Councils, and the Corporative Cham- 
ber. The Chamber crowns the corporative 
organisation of the nation, bringing together 
representatives of all phases of national activity to 
discuss and resolve their common problems, and 
to shape all the nation's work towards national 
well-being and prosperity. This political aspect 
of corporatism Is the matter of the next chapter, in 
which the Corporative Chamber will be discussed 
in detail. 

It remains here to mention two further bodies: 
the National Institute of Labour and Social We^- 
fare, and the Corporative Council The former, 
which is presided over by the Under-Secretary of 
State for the Corporations, exists In order "to en- 



THE CORPORATE STATE 7 

sure the fulfilment of the laws protecting the 
workers, and of other laws of social character, by 
integrating the workers, and others taking part In 
production, In the corporative organisation, as 
laid down In the Statute of National Labour, ac- 
cording to the spirit of political, economic, an$ 
social renovation of the Portuguese Nation." 25 

The Corporative Council Is the supreme body 
through which Is exercised the general supervision 
of the Government over the development of the 
corporate structure. According to the law estab- 
lishing it, 26 "All the decisions of the Council, 
provided that they be not an infringement or an 
alteration of the existing laws, are norms to be 
followed In the corporative organization, and they 
are to be immediately put into effect by the Min- 
istries and departments concerned/* Its members 
are the President of the Council of Ministers, two 
University Professors, and a number of ex-officio 
representatives of various ministerial departments. 
This Council was created a year later than the 
National Institute of Labour and Social Welfare: 
and It seems possible that a little widening of the 
scope of that Institute might have made It un- 
necessary, so avoiding the creation of an extra 
body that has no representatives of the Corpora- 
tions upon it. But no doubt the Portuguese know 
best. 



98 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

IV 

Having described the Portuguese Corporate 
State as It exists on paper, some mention must be 
made o what has already been done towards 
translating it into reality. I say already because 
the Estado Novo Is coming Into being surely but 
gradually. Plans for educating illiterate millions 
overnight, for bringing about an unheard of pros- 
perity In the course of a few days, have always 
characterised Liberal and "progressive" regimes 
in the Peninsula; we have the example of the vast 
promises, so soon confounded, made by the Span- 
ish Republicans in 1931. Or again, there was 
very soon a bitter irony about the rhetorical proc- 
lamation issued to the Portuguese people by the 
new Republican Government on October 5, 1910. 
"Now at last ends the slavery of our country, and, 
luminous in its virginal essence, rises the benefi- 
cent aspiration of a regime of liberty/' And so 
on. The Republic had to give the people rhet- 
oric, for it had nothing else to give. But there 
has never been any rhetoric about Salazar: his 
promises have always been most guarded, and the 
realisation more than the anticipation. First and 
foremost he is a realist: he is one of the very few 
politicians who have never allowed themselves to 
be mesmerised by words. "All one hears to-day 
on the subject of liberty/' he has written, "or of 



THE CORPORATE STATE 99 

Parliament, or democracy, or about the rights of 
the people and the brotherhood of man all that 
has been standardised to such an extent that we 
shall soon be able to buy speeches ready-made to 
suit all occasions, as we can already buy love- 
letters." 

"Wisely inoculated against the disease of ex- 
treme ideologies/' writes M. Maeterlinck of him, 
"he admits nothing that will not stand the test of 
daily experience. His mind Is a veritable labora- 
tory, where distilled Utopias are made practi- 
cal." 27 To quote his own words again. "The 
Portuguese Republic Is a Corporate State by 
definition, but that does not mean to say that the 
corporative organisation Is already realised wher- 
ever we have decided that it is possible and de- 
sirable. Far from It: we can have no rapid 
advance, but a slow and sure progress, as we are 
trying out a new system which has not yet been 
used sufficiently to make it possible to proceed 
without extreme caution/' 2S Or again, In 1934: 
"We are aware that there are grave errors in our 
economic and social organisation unjust inequal- 
ities, imperfections, misery, falsities, and contra- 
dictionsand we have got to remedy them, or 
wipe them out. It is for that that we continue 
our revolution; but our revolution, if it is to be 
lasting, cannot destroy that upon which It Is based 
the fundamental principles, founded in the 



100 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

labour and the sufferings of past generations, the 
great realities of social life." 29 And in his famous 
speech of July 30, 1930: "Because we are embody- 
ing our Ideas in a Constitution, we must not jump 
to the conclusion that the remedy for all political 
evils Is found. ... It Is not a programme for 
angels/* 

The reconstruction of Portugal has been and is 
being a slow matter of trial and error and patient 
endeavour, guided throughout by those social 
principles which we have tried to set out in the 
foregoing pages. Nevertheless, very considerable 
progress has been made, under the guidance of 
Salazar and his Ministers, among whom should 
Dr. Pedro Teotonio Perelra be specifically men- 
tioned. 

The organisation of industry and commerce 
was undertaken first, being the most intricate as 
well as the most urgent necessity. The organisa- 
tion began at the bottom: national syndicates and 
gremios came first. We have seen how in the case 
of the latter the Initiative came in the first In- 
stance from the Government, as it had to; and 
how the workers' organisation was the work of the 
workers themselves. Under the "Liberal" regime, 
all Trade Unions were regulated by a restrictive 
law of May 9, 1891; but there were nearly 1,000 
of them In 1930, before Salazar began his work. 
There were so many because most of them had no 



THE CORPORATE STATE 1O1 

more than a purely nominal existence. It was 
doubtful whether collective bargaining was per- 
mitted by the law of 1891, even ia its widest 
interpretation; at all events, the general interpre- 
tation of it, which certainly expressed its spirit, 
did not allow it. A decree of December 21, 1924, 
anticipated the formation of federated unions and 
the establishment of principles for collective bar- 
gaining "according to the terms of a further law"; 
but this further law never appeared, and the de- 
cree was no more than a mirage. "One thing, at 
any rate, is evident: collective labour agreements 
had no binding force; there was no authority to 
ensure their application, and apart from one or 
two isolated and irregular examples, Portugal 
never knew them." 30 The Estado Novo has 
meant justice for the labouring Portuguese such 
as he had not known for over a century. 

Salazar has always put the working-man first. 
His syndicates are now fully organised and fully 
effective, and meet and collaborate with the or- 
ganisations of his employers. The "Unions" and 
"Federations" described above are also in exist- 
ence in many cases; but the complete structure of 
the Corporations is not yet achieved. Portugal is, 
however, more than halfway from liberal-capital- 
ist chaos to corporate order. 

All that has been done in the various industries 
has been described in detail, in English, by M. 



102 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

Freppel Gotta, in his book Economic Planning in 
Corporative Portugal But there are two in par- 
ticular, which concern between them a very large 
proportion of the working population, in which 
particular progress has been made: the industries 
of fishing and agriculture. These well illustrate 
the work of the new regime. 

For centuries the men of Portugal have been 
men of the sea: navigators and fishermen. The 
calling of the sea is rooted deeply in all the history 
and traditions of the country; and the men of the 
coastal villages who catch fish are living to-day the 
lives that their fathers and grandfathers have lived 
before them through the ages. The new Govern- 
ment has not attempted to impose the full rigour 
of corporative symmetry upon this ancient indus- 
try; here are well illustrated its twin virtues of 
adaptability and the avoidance of bureaucracy. 
Particular plans have been made to suit particular 
needs. A special law, dated March n, 1937, con- 
cerns the fishermen. 

Employers and purchasers, owners of boats and 
others upon whom the fishermen depend, are 
grouped, as normally, into gremios. But for the 
men themselves there are not syndicates on the 
national plan, but special institutions called Casas 
dos Pescadores, Houses of the Fishermen, to which 
their employers and the owners of their fleets are 
also obliged to belong, and over each of which 



THE CORPORATE STATE 

there Is one at every fishing port an official cor- 
responding to the English Harbour Master pre- 
sides. The Casa dos Pescadores, then, includes 
both masters and men, and Is designed chiefly as 
an organ of social co-operation. Its functions are 
classified under three heads: the representation 
and defence of professional interests; the Instruc- 
tion of the young In the art of fishing; and care for 
the sick, assistance for those who have suffered loss 
In storms, and general welfare work. It Is some- 
thing remarkably close to the medieval guild. 
And it Is of the first importance to note the follow- 
ing clause in the law: "The Casas dos Pescadores 
have the duty of guarding jealously all local tradi- 
tions and customs, particularly those related in 
spirit specifically to men of the sea/' "As far back 
as the first half of the fourteenth century/' writes 
Freppel Gotta, "the fisherfolk had formed admira- 
ble confraternities In which religious and moral 
welfare was combined with economic and social 
relief, and the influence of which was still visible 
in the prevailing rules of fishing, and generally in 
the customs of all the fisherfolk. Those confra- 
ternities were the accredited representatives of all 
seafarers, and were designed to help their widows, 
the sick and the disabled, and even to make good 
the loss caused by shipwreck or damage. Their reve- 
nue was derived from levies on catches or wages, 
collected and distributed as fairly as possible in a 



104 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

true Christian spirit. The Casas dos Pescadores 
have retained as much as possible of those confra- 
ternities." 31 Nothing could better demonstrate 
the essential traditionalism of the Estado Novo, 
which is In reality not a "New State" at all, but 
the ancient Portugal of history and the centuries. 

The whole spirit of the new corporatism, in- 
deed, may be found In this particular application 
of it. We see its traditionalism, its sympathetic 
power of adaptation, its avoidance of bureaucracy, 
and at the same time the recognition that the In- 
corrigibly illiterate and unpractical nature of the 
Portuguese people, as well as the need for co- 
ordination, makes necessary the creation of a mod- 
icum of officials. The various Casas dos Pesca- 
dores, scattered round the coast, receive control 
from a central board, which administers their 
common funds, so that those in the less prosperous 
localities may be adequately equipped. 

Fishing and agriculture, the two oldest occupa- 
tions of mankind, together provide the livelihood 
of a substantial majority of the Portuguese. We 
have seen that it is the Intention of Salazar to give 
to Portugal an agricultural peasantry of independ- 
ent small proprietors. With this purpose, exten- 
sive irrigation schemes have been undertaken in 
the Aleintejo, In the basins of the Tagus and Sado 
rivers, where the rainfall is small and Irregular, to 
make possible small-scale farming where it was not 



THE CORPORATE STATE 105 

possible before. "We have already outlaid a mil- 
lion to initiate this irrigation policy/' Salazar told 
Antonio Ferro, "and you will see that peacefully 
and quietly, without any kind of violence, we are 
carrying out a very far-reaching social work. What 
I say has been absolutely proved. In the north of 
Italy, for instance, and In the basin of the Ebro 
and other districts of Spain, the division of prop- 
erty by water has been successfully carried out; 
and In the east and south-east o Europe, where, 
especially since the War, a policy of distribution 
of the land has been followed by cutting up large 
estates as one would a piece of cloth, without re- 
gard for natural conditions, It is not difficult to see 
that that policy has failed/' 32 

There is in Portugal, then, a large population 
of small farmers and agricultural peasantsa 
population which is being extensively increased. 
These men, the great backbone of Portugal and, 
Indeed, of any country, are for the most part 
neither employers nor employed. If they are em- 
ployers, they are employers only of one or two 
labourers; nor do they specialise but practise gen- 
eral subsistence farming. It is evident that they 
cannot be fitted into the general corporative 
scheme of syndicates and gremios; and this has 
been recognised from the beginning. In the very 
first article of the Decree-Law of September 23, 
1933, w hich governs them, the Casas do Povo, or 



1O6 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

Houses of the People, are called bodies for social 
co-operation, and not simply associations for the 
pursuance of professional interests, like the syndi- 
cates. The syndicates also aim at social co-opera- 
tion, which, In their case, owing to their greater 
compactness and organisation, is more easily 
achieved; but they are primarily professional asso- 
ciations, vocational groups. The purpose of the 
Casas do Povo is to provide rural centres for social 
purposes. They are created on the initiative of 
the people themselves, or by the Government 
when it is thought necessary. All land-owners are 
obliged to contribute to their maintenance, and 
grants are also made by the State and by local ad- 
ministrative bodies. Their function is to provide 
social centres, assist the needy, educate the igno- 
rant (a colossal task) , and generally to raise the 
standard of rural life. They will make loans to 
peasants for agricultural purposes or for setting 
up small home industries, and provide unemploy- 
ment relief, when necessary, in the form of work. 
Provision has also been made for the creation of 
special agricultural gremios, to protect the inter- 
ests of those who produce for market, and these 
can be organised into Unions and Federations. 
Commercial agriculture follows the general plan, 
and corporative organisation is well advanced in 
the production of the important products of 
wheat, wine, fruit, and rice. The same princi- 



THE CORPORATE STATE 107 

pies are being followed In every case: order Is 
being brought into the national economy by that 
which is inappropriately enough called a "dicta- 
torship" it is a dictatorship which has declared 
for a policy of laisser-faire,, but which will laisser- 
faire not isolated individuals but organised pro- 
fessions, autonomous corporations. 



CHAPTER 



4 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 



T is unlikely that those who are acquainted 
with the great social encyclicals of Leo XIII 
and the present Pope, and whose knowledge of 
the Portuguese Estado Novo is no more than they 
have obtained from the previous chapters of this 
book, will have any serious quarrel with the opin- 
ion of the American Jesuit who recently wrote 
that "the whole system is, in effect, an applied re- 
sume of Catholic political philosophy and of the 
Papal encyclicals." x The influence of these upon 
the mind of Salazar has already been noted; and 
Fr. Muller finds a "direct agreement" between 
Quadragesima Anno and the Statute of National 
Labour. 2 The words of Pius XI in Divini Re- 
demptoris, that "a sound prosperity is to be re- 
stored according to the true principles of a sane 
corporative system'* might well appear to be an 
endorsement of the work of Salazar, and of his 
Constitution in which the influence of the encycli- 
cal of six years earlier is so apparent. 

But there is more to the matter. Manoilesco 8 

108 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE log 

rightly distinguishes three kinds of corporativism: 
(i) Pure; (2) mixed; (3) subordinate. In the 
first the corporations constitute the sole source of 
the supreme legislative power; in the second that 
power Is shared with other sources, such as a par- 
liament based on universal suffrage; and In the 
third the corporations, with their organ of na- 
tional integration, have only an advisory capacity. 
To him the only true corporative system Is that of 
the first kind; and It is not possible to claim Papal 
approval for any system of political machinery. 
The Popes have not been concerned with politics, 
but only with the truths of religion and the moral 
principles which politics must respect, and which 
It Is the business of the Church to maintain. The 
Church regards Indifferently any form of govern- 
ment, so long as the essential moral rights of man 
are acknowledged and safeguarded. According to 
Leo XIII in Immortale Dei., "Not one of the sev- 
eral forms of government is in itself condemned, 
as none of them contains anything contrary to 
Catholic doctrine, and all of them are capable, if 
wisely and justly managed, of ensuring the welfare 
of the State." 

Liberalism Is a condemned error, because it 
teaches that "every man is a law unto himself/' 
and because liberty of thought is in obvious con- 
flict with Revealed religion. But the usual politi- 
cal concomitants of Liberalism the doctrines of 



HO THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

Parliamentary democracy, of universal franchise, 
of political toleration do not stand condemned. 
And if Salazar has introduced in Portugal a cor- 
porativism other than the third of the three types 
distinguished by M. Manoi'lesco, if there is in the 
corporative system any political significance, then 
it is something more than the corporative system 
of which Divini Redemptoris speaks. 

And that is, in fact, the case. As has already 
been pointed out, the Portuguese corporative sys- 
tem is still in process of development, and it is not 
yet possible to say what form it will finally take. 
But it is already clear that the Corporative Cham- 
ber is to have more than a purely advisory capac- 
ity, whether or not it may ultimately be the sole 
legislative body. Moreover, there is every indica- 
tion that it is to be the chief legislative body, and 
that the present undeniably authoritarian Govern- 
ment will give place to a form of organic democ- 
racy working on a functional basis through the 
corporations. It is at least certain that Portugal 
will not revert to Liberal parliamentary democ- 
racy on the English pattern; and before going on 
to discuss the present system of government and 
the possibilities of the future, we will explain why 
that is certain, by devoting a few pages to a brief 
historical survey of "democracy" in the Peninsula, 
and, in particular, in Portugal. 

Rather more than a century ago, civil war came 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 111 

to both Spain and Portugal, where already the 
Napoleonic Invasions had wasted and destroyed. 
In each case the war was one between rival claim- 
ants to the throne, one representing the tradi- 
tional Monarchy, and the other (In each case a 
small girl) representing the ideas of the French 
Revolution, and heading what most historians 
term the Constitutional party. It was scarcely a 
generation since the fall of the Bastille. Particu- 
larly in the seaport towns of the Peninsula, those 
who saw political or financial power within their 
grasp played upon the war-weariness of the people 
to stimulate revolution. Don Carlos in Spain and 
Dom Miguel in Portugal were both followed by 
the greater part of their people; but the child 
Isabella in Spain and the child Maria da Gloria in 
Portugal both prevailed because both were given 
support from abroad by those who saw In "pro- 
gressive" and "enlightened" governments possi- 
bilities of valuable trading concessions or lucrative 
fields for investment. A typical story was re- 
counted recently with remarkable candour In a 
supplement to The Times* in an account of the 
early days of the P. & O. Steamship Company, of 
which one Arthur Anderson was a founder. "The 
insurrection against the Queen of Portugal in the 
eighteen-thirties gave Anderson his first chance to 
show his mettle as a ship-owner. He and his part- 
ner came In on the Queen's side with all their 



112 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

resources, running cargoes of munitions and help- 
ing in every way they could. As a consequence 
when the rebellion was stamped out, they were 
given valuable trading concessions. Exactly the 
same thing happened shortly afterwards in con- 
nection with the Carlist outbreak in Spain, and 
the subsequent consolidation of their position In 
these two countries led Anderson and Willcox to 
charter several tiny steamers, the success of which 
enabled them to establish the first regular steam- 
ship line to Spain and Portugal in 1836." 

There was no nonsense about non-intervention 
In those days. Canning, as British foreign secre- 
tary, knew just what Portuguese "Constitutional- 
Ism" amounted to, having earlier In his career 
been Ambassador at Lisbon for a short period, and 
sent out British redcoats to safeguard democracy. 
Palmerston allowed Pedro, father of the child- 
Queen, to enlist troops in the English workhouses, 
which were rather full at the time, and helped 
him to enlist them In Belgium. He also sent a 
British naval force in the cause, under the com- 
mand of Captain Napier, R.N., an excellent 
British sailor and hero of the Syrian campaign of 
1840, who on this occasion found it more con- 
venient to be known as El Almiral Carlos Ponza. 

Similar steps were taken to preserve Spain from 
Don Carlos. The British Government lent 540,- 
ooo to the child Isabella for military expenses, and 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 

gave permission for the raising of ten thousand 
men in England. The British Legion, under the 
command of Sir George de Lacy Evans, did not 
exactly cover itself with glory; but Palmerston's 
"inter-meddling/' together with assistance from 
financial and commercial Interests, was sufficient 
to ensure the success of political liberalism. The 
full iniquity of this work Is to-day apparent; Spain 
is fighting again the same war, and the same Inter- 
national interests, together with others more 
deadly, are pitted against her. That Portugal Is 
not also bathed In blood is due to Antonio de 
Ollveira Salazar. 

The war against Dom Miguel In Portugal, 
against whom, as Palmerston said in the House of 
Commons In June 1829, "^ e civilised world rings 
with execrations/' continued, owing to the strange 
preference of the Portuguese for tyranny, until 
May 1834, when he abandoned his claims by the 
Convention of Evora Monte. The child Maria da 
Gloria, at the time at school in Paris, was con- 
firmed on the throne, and Portugal entered upon 
a century of confusion. 

These are broad generalisations; and It is easy 
for over-simplification to become mere historical 
distortion. It is historical distortion to say that 
the MIguelist war was simply a conflict between 
national sentiment and foreign Interests, in which 
the latter won. But it is also historical distortion 



114 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

to say that Spain or Portugal In any way desired or 
were suited to representative government. "One 
of the greatest mistakes o the nineteenth cen- 
tury/' writes Salazar, with profound truth, "was 
to suppose that the English parliamentary system, 
English democracy, was a form of government 
capable of adaptation to the needs of all European 
peoples/' 5 It is a pity that that historical fact is 
not clear to those well-intentioned Englishmen 
who so bitterly denounce General Franco as a 
' 'Fascist* ' and a destroyer of liberty. 

In Portugal, as in Spain, Parliamentary govern- 
ment on the English pattern has always meant a 
chaos of camarillas and caciquismo, corruption, 
rotativlsni and revolution; it has meant the crea- 
tion of a class of professional politicians preying 
on the people: a travesty of democracy screening 
the machinations of profiteers. That will seem 
like a sentence of excited exaggeration until the 
political history of Portugal in the nineteenth cen- 
tury comes to be written in English. English 
electioneering methods of the eighteenth do not 
bear comparison with those of Portugal. The 
electorate in 1871 was less than seven per cent of 
the population, and was wholly controlled, not by 
bribes, as in the good old English fashion, but by 
local "bosses/* 

The Portuguese of the years before 1926 cared 
little and knew less about what went on at San 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 115 

Bento, where the Cortes sat, and where (as he was 
always told) he was the ultimate controlling Influ- 
ence. "As disorder followed disorder, he turned 
himself always more deeply towards his wife and 
his children, his house, his daily work, the field, 
the garden, the forest. These things had been 
known to his parents, to his grandparents, and to 
his ancestors through the ages, who had succes- 
sively dug the soil, cultivated the vine and the 
patch of maize, reared children, suffered . . ." 6 
What use was the "vote 9 * to him? He w r as, and 
remains, an incorrigible illiterate, concerned only 
with the realities of life, with hardship and the 
soil, and with eternity. 

"If Lisbon turns Turk to-morrow, all Portugal 
will wear the Fez," wrote the novelist Eca de 
Queiroz. Too often has the voice of the Lisbon 
mob been taken for the voice of Portugal It was 
republican Lisbon that made Portugal a Republic 
in 1910; and the reasons why Lisbon was republi- 
can have been told in an earlier chapter. Only a 
few months previously King Manoel had made a 
journey through the country districts of Beira 
"which in some places became a triumphant prog- 
ress, the peasants pressing eagerly to welcome 
their King/* 7 But Lisbon turned Turk, and 
Portugal accepted, unprotesting, unknowing. For 
the last Ministry of the Monarchy, the elections of 
August 28, 1910, returned 14 Republicans among 



Il6 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

144 deputies. Of these 14, 10 came from Lisbon. 
And when the Republic was proclaimed, the mil- 
lions of Portuguese knew nothing of the matter, 
had no more hand in it than they had ever had in 
the affairs of Portugal, and were concerned In It 
only In so far as the fantastic confusion into which 
Portuguese politics were immediately plunged 
had its effect upon their daily lives. 

The constant succession of revolutions between 
1910 and 1926 were exclusively political in charac- 
ter, and were unnoticed outside Lisbon: the gen- 
eral disappearance of administrative order and 
the general rise in the cost of living continued 
steadily and without interruption. In 1926 the 
country rose: we have told the story already. 

The Government that then, in the name of the 
nation, took control of affairs was a dictatorship. 
It was a dictatorship in the Roman sense of the 
word: that is, a Government that had seized tem- 
porary absolutism to meet a national emergency. 
It was certainly not a dictatorship in the modern 
sense of a tyranny: it represented a release from 
tyranny, from the intolerable tyranny of the pro- 
fessional politicians and the local bosses. At the 
beginning of 1928, General Oscar Carmona sub- 
mitted his de facto Presidency to the country; on 
March 2 5th a popular mandate confirmed him In 
his office. Four years later a new Constitution 
which had been drawn up under the guidance of 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 11? 

the Minister of Finance, Dr. Salazar, was also sub- 
mitted to the country for approval. The plebis- 
cite was taken on March 19, 1933, and resulted as 
follows: 

Number of the electorate . . 1,330,268 

Votes In favour 1,292,864 

Votes opposing 6,090 

Spoilt votes 660 

Abstentions ............. 30,654 

The Government then ceased to be a dictator- 
ship, since It became government through a popu- 
larly approved Constitution. It remained an 
authoritarian Government, and one that can best 
be described as a Constitutional Monarchy. 

I say a Monarchy because that word means the 
rule of one man. Salazar Is a Monarch. In Por- 
tugal In 1926, as so often in ancient Rome, and as 
ten years later In Spain, It was the army that gave 
expression to the voice of the people. It was the 
army which gave power to Salazar; but Salazar was 
none the less far from being the nominee of a 
military Junta. He accepted office on his own 
terms, and since that time he has proved himself 
to be In the truest sense the servant of his people. 
Kings are sometimes the puppets of oligarchy, but 
Monarchs are always the servants of their people, 
and lose power when they cease to be so. A Mon- 
arch, by the support of the masses of his subjects, 



Il8 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

holds In check all those who In the nature of 
things hold high office in the State, and curbs the 
ambition of those who would turn administrative 
power to their own ends. A Monarch is the an- 
swer to the ancient question of Juvenal: Quis 
custodiet ipsos custodesl If he ceases to be the 
champion of his people, the balance is lost; au- 
thority passes from his hands, and the country is 
governed by oligarchy. 

Portugal was governed during the nineteenth 
century, and during the first quarter of the twen- 
tieth, by a Liberal-Masonic oligarchy. But Salazar, 
who has eradicated both individualist Liberalism 
and anti-popular Freemasonry, is a Monarch: his 
rule is popular and national, and he would have 
been hounded from Lisbon years ago were it not 
so, either by the people, or by the dispossessed 
oligarchy appealing to the chimera of democracy. 

To-day, then, Portugal is governed under a 
Monarchical Constitution. But there is every in- 
dication that this is only to last until the Corporate 
organisation of the country is fully developed, 
when the Corporative Chamber will become the 
chief, if not the only legislative body, and the form 
of government will become one that can be de- 
scribed as organic democracy. 8 The very fact that 
the present Constitution contains such ample pro- 
vision for revision is perhaps an indication that it 
is not regarded as final. 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE H 

We will, therefore, consider first the Constitu- 
tional Monarchy of to-day, and then the possibili- 
ties of the future. It will be interesting to see 
whether the Royal House of Braganza is restored. 
That may happen either before or after the pres- 
ent form of government is superseded. There is 
no heir in the direct line; but Dom Duarte Nuno, 
heir in the Miguelist line, is a young man, at 
present living in Austria. He is known to be in 
sympathy with the work of Salazar. It is not alto- 
gether improbable that in 1942, when the term of 
office of President Carmona comes to an end, the 
Constitution will be adapted so that Portugal can 
receive him back; then will the historic Portugal 
be fully vindicated. General Carmona is an el- 
derly man, and is in his second term of office, hav- 
ing been re-elected (by an even larger vote than 
before) in 1935. It is unlikely that he will stand 
again. It is not impossible that in four years from 
now we shall have the Royal Houses restored both 
in Portugal and in Spain. 

The restoration of the House of Braganza will 
not happen, of course, until all memories of the 
old party conflicts have been forgotten. The new 
Portugal does not tolerate political faction of any 
kind; it does not tolerate a Royalist faction. That 
is why, in November 1937, Paiva Couceiro, leader 
of Royalist disturbances in 1911, 1912, and 1919, 
was expelled from the country. But in a speech 



120 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

In 1932, Salazar paid a handsome tribute to the 
memory of King Manoel and gave the Impression 
that, when Portugal Is ready, she will call back her 
Kings. 

ii 

The Constitution of 1933 Is divided Into two 
parts. The first concerns "Fundamental Guaran- 
tees'': it defines the functions of the State, the 
rights of citizens, the Importance of the family, the 
principles governing the administration, and so 
on. In all that there is not likely to be significant 
change. Part II concerns "The Political Organi- 
sation of the State' 5 : it Is that which we now have 
to describe, and which, as we surmise, may un- 
dergo revision in the future. 

Article LXXI, which is the first of Part II, de- 
clares that "Sovereignty shall reside in the Nation. 
Its organs are the Head of the State, the National 
Assembly, the Government, and the Courts of 
Justice." It resides In the Nation, as distinct from 
being attributed to "the people"; that is, the old 
atomic liberalism has been replaced by a concep- 
tion of society as an organic whole. It will be 
noted that although the Government is accounted 
an organ of sovereignty, the Corporative Chamber 
is not so at present. 

The Head of the State is the President of the 
Republic, who is elected by direct suffrage for a 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 121 

period of seven years, and Is re-eligible Indefi- 
nitely: a valuable means for securing continuity 
of policy is thus provided. By Article LXXVIII, 
"The President of the Republic shall be directly 
and exclusively responsible to the nation for ac- 
tions performed In the exercise of his duties. In 
that and In his magistracy he shall be entirely in- 
dependent of any vote of the National Assembly." 
He nominates the Prime Minister and other 
Ministers, who hold office subject to his will, and 
Is empowered arbitrarily to dissolve the National 
Assembly "when the supreme Interests of the Na- 
tion so require/' He appears to hold very con- 
siderable power. 

When we come to Article LXXXII, however, 
we find that "the acts of the President of the Re- 
public must be counter-signed by the President of 
the Council of Ministers, and by any other ap- 
propriate Minister or Ministers, falling which 
they shall ipso facto be null and void." Three 
exceptions only are made to this rule: no counter- 
signature is required for the appointment or dis- 
missal of the President of the Council of Ministers, 
for messages sent to the National Assembly, or for 
his own resignation. 

Article LXXXIII provides for a Council of 
State to act in conjunction with the President of 
the Republic on all important occasions, and to 
consist of the President of the Council of Minis- 



122 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

ters (to whom It Is simpler and less confusing to 
refer as the Prime Minister) , the Presidents of the 
National Assembly, the Corporative Chamber, 
and the Supreme Court of Justice, and "five pub- 
lic men of outstanding ability." 

But it is not difficult to see that real power in 
the State lies with the Government, and that real 
power in the Government lies with the Prime 
Minister, despite the fact that he can be dismissed 
at will by the President. That is, real power In 
Portugal to-day lies with Dr. Salazar. 

"The Government/' says Article CVII, "shall 
consist of the Prime Minister, who may conduct 
the affairs of one or more Ministries, and the Min- 
isters/' Salazar to-day holds the Ministries of 
Finance, War, and Foreign Affairs, in addition to 
the Premiership. 10 

"The Prime Minister shall be responsible to the 
President of the Republic for the general policy 
of the Government, and shall co-ordinate and 
direct the activities of all the Ministers, who shall 
be responsible to him for their political acts" 
(Article CVIII) . "The Government shall de- 
pend exclusively on the confidence of the Presi- 
dent of the Republic, and their retention of power 
shall not depend on the fate suffered by their bills, 
or on any vote of the National Assembly" (Ar- 
ticle CXII) . Members of the Government need 
not be drawn from the National Assembly; in- 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 123 

deed, "Members of the National Assembly or of the 
Corporative Chamber who accept ministerial 
office shall not forfeit their mandates, but may not 
sit in their respective Chambers" (Article CX) . 

The National Assembly is the nominal legis- 
lature, but all legislation of importance comes in 
fact from the Government, and there is every 
reason to suppose that the National Assembly is 
really intendedif it is to be retained at all as a 
check on the executive. It sits for only three 
months of the year and any member has the power 
to initiate any legislation that does not involve an 
increase in national expenditure or a decrease in 
national revenue; any legislation approved by an 
absolute majority of the Assembly is submitted to 
the President of the Republic for promulgation, 
which may be refused. And all legislation of con- 
sequence comes from the Government during the 
nine months of the year when the Assembly is not 
sitting, in the form of Decree-Laws issued under 
Article CIX. 

But if the National Assembly is not the normal 
legislative body, it has sufficient power to act as an 
effective check on the Government if necessary, 
For that reason it is probable that it will be re- 
tained. In the first place, if a law that has been 
refused promulgation by the President is brought 
up again in the National Assembly, and, being 
voted on again, receives a two-thirds majority of 



124 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

the votes of all members, then the President can- 
not a second time withhold his assent. And in the 
second place, a Decree-Law issued by the Govern- 
ment must come before the National Assembly 
when next that body is in session, and if ratifica- 
tion is refused, then it ceases from that day to be 
valid. 

The National Assembly consists of ninety mem- 
bers elected by direct suffrage. An elaborate sys- 
tem of holding the elections has been devised to 
obviate the possibility of the formation of any 
political parties. There are no constituencies. 
At least thirty days before an election, complete 
lists of ninety candidates, signed by at least two 
hundred electors, must be submitted to the Gov- 
ernment. The names on all such lists submitted, 
if considered eligible, are published in alphabeti- 
cal order in the official journal, the Didrio do 
Govern o, and in at least two other national news- 
papers. On the day of the election, voters cross off 
from these lists such candidates as they may not 
approve, thereby voting for the rest; they may not 
add names that do not appear. The ninety candi- 
dates whose names are uncrossed-off on the largest 
number of lists represent the personnel of the new 
Assembly* It is never likely to be a very truculent 
body, since the Government can reject any candi- 
date deemed ineligible, and among the require- 
ments is a profession of fidelity to the regime. 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 125 

The Corporative Chamber exists, according to 
the original version of the Constitution, "to report 
and to give its opinion In writing on ail proposi- 
tions or projects of law which shall be presented 
to the National Assembly, before the opening of 
discussion thereupon" (Article GUI) . By an 
amendment of March 1935, the phrase "in writ- 
Ing" was deleted, and the Chamber was required 
also to report "on all International conventions or 
treaties/* In doing that It Is clearly doing some- 
thing more than providing technical advice on 
specialised subjects. Again, the Constitution 
originally laid down that It should sit only while 
the National Assembly was In session; but another 
amendment of the same date added that "In the 
intervals between legislative sessions, the Govern- 
ment shall be able to consult the specialised 
departments of the Corporative Chamber on de- 
cree-laws it is about to publish, or on laws It pro- 
poses to lay before the National Assembly/* Both 
these amplifications seem to show that Salazar in- 
tends that, when the Corporations are properly or- 
ganised, and the Portuguese Corporate State has 
got beyond its present transitional stage, the Cor- 
porative Chamber will be given wider scope. M. 
Freppel Cotta Is of the opinion that "the National 
Assembly will be dispensed with, and the Cham- 
ber will act as the adviser of the Government, 
which will itself legislate/' 1X 



126 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

That is not the opinion of the present writer: 
he prefers to think that the National Assembly 
will be retained, for reasons he has stated, but that 
the Corporative Chamber will become the chief 
legislative body. It is difficult to say definitely 
what is the intention of Salazar. In his speech of 
January 26, 1934, he spoke of the present position 
of the Corporative Chamber as "transitional"; and 
on December gth of that year he delivered an 
important speech on the subject, in which he said 
definitely that he does not propose to abolish the 
Assembly "without the preparation of a long ex- 
perience' '; on the other hand he ventured the 
opinion that in twenty years' time there will be no 
purely political legislative assemblies left in Eu- 
rope. We can but wait upon events. But it is at 
any rate clear that Portuguese corporatism, which 
gives the Corporative Chamber a voice in such 
matters as the conduct of foreign affairs, does not 
fall into the third of the three types distinguished 
by M. Manoilesco, and that it therefore represents 
something more than the "sane corporative sys- 
tem" recommended by the present Pope. 

"With a lively apprehension of its responsibility 
before the nation the embodiment of all the ma- 
terial and moral achievements of past generations 
the State is profoundly national, popular with- 
out being demagogic, representative but anti- 
'democratic,' strong but neither tyrannous nor 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 

all-absorbing. JJ 12 Those words of Salazar describe 
his Intentions. He Is against "democracy" In the 
sense In which Portugal has known it: he has 
eradicated political liberalism together with eco- 
nomic liberalism. But the essence of his Govern- 
ment Is that It Is popular, and it Is Inconceivable 
that M. Cotta Is right in thinking that he proposes 
to give all legislative power to a government con- 
trolled only, and slightly at that, by a President 
elected every seven years. It is much more likely, 
whether or not the Assembly Is retained, that the 
Corporative Chamber will be given something 
considerably more than a purely advisory capacity, 
even if It does not become the sole legislature, and 
that a real democracy will thereby be attained. 
The working of that democracy will be described 
in the next section of this chapter. 

Those who disagree with or do not understand 
the Idea of functional representation, and prefer a 
legislative assembly on the lines of the modern 
English House of Commons, would do well to re- 
member that In Its fourteenth-century origins the 
English Parliament was a typically corporative 
body. That is to say, Its members were not 
elected by a few thousand miscellaneous citizens 
whom fate had placed all within the same geo- 
graphical area, but represented the Estates of the 
Realm, and were called to advise the King on 
those matters of which, from their positions In 



128 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

life, they had particular and personal interest. 
The idea of corporate democracy is an older thing, 
even in England, than the Liberal democracy that 
was for a century so tragically copied in Portugal. 



in 

On June 30, 1930, Salazar delivered a speech to 
which the phrase "epoch-making" can accurately 
be applied, and which is ''regarded as the Charter 
of the New State/' 13 The occasion was the found- 
ing of the Uniao National the National Union 
the organisation of those who, renouncing all 
party politics, have pledged themselves to support 
Salazar in his work of national reconstruction. In 
this speech Salazar, who has been Finance Minis- 
ter for two years, but has not yet become Prime 
Minister, describes the principles which the future 
Portugal will follow. It is the first important 
occasion on which he has publicly associated him- 
self with wider matters than his immediate work 
as specialist in economics and finance: it marks his 
emergence as the national leader. 

He is more concerned with the political future 
than with social principles. "We know only too 
well/' he said, "that if the dictatorship were to go, 
and to give place to the rule of faction, it would 
mean the end of all the work of reconstruction, of 
all the possibilities of the present; the old causes 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 12Q 

of chaos and ruin would return, their destructive 
force accentuated by increased indiscipline, by ex- 
acerbated passions, by the collapse of all material 
and moral defences against disordereven to the 
extent of undermining the conditions necessary to 
the very existence of society/' It was true; a 
rigorous dictatorship was an absolute necessity, if 
life was to be carried on at all, in the Portugal of 
those years following 1926. Every kind of revo- 
lutionary and subversive activity was being car- 
ried on against the Government, particularly by 
Communists and exiled politicians of the old 
regime. The most formidable attack came in 
1931, when riots and disturbances in Madeira, 
Portuguese Guinea, and the Azores involved a 
good deal of damage and loss of life. The plan 
was to make trouble in these places and in 
different parts of the country, so occupying the 
Government, compelling it to send troops abroad, 
diverting other troops to the country districts of 
Portugal, and laying Lisbon open to a coup d'etat. 
Nothing came of it, owing to the fact that Portugal 
was solidly behind Salazar; and The Times was 
frank enough to say: "It is common knowledge 
that this trouble is the work of Portuguese politi- 
cians in exile in Paris, and particularly of some of 
the former heads of the Portuguese Grand 
Orient." " 

The Dictatorship, then, was an absolute neces- 



IgO THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

slty; nevertheless, It was never regarded by Salazar 
as more than a temporary expedient, to give place 
to constitutional government so soon as the new 
Constitution could be drawn up, and so soon as 
the smouldering animosities of the old liberal 
party system should have sufficiently died down. 
"There is no doubt/* said Salazar on the fourth 
anniversary of the national rising, "that the dic- 
tatorship, even considered only as a restriction to 
the Government of the power to make laws, is a 
political formula; but one cannot say that it rep- 
resents the lasting solution of the political prob- 
lem; it is essentially a formula of transition. 

"Since dictatorships often arise from conflict 
between authority and the abusers of liberty, and 
since they generally have recourse to measures 
restricting freedom of association and the freedom 
of the Press, dictatorship is often confused with 
tyranny. That is not its essence; and if liberty is 
understood as the full guarantee of the rights of 
all to my mind the only true conception of it- 
then may dictatorship, without sophistry, rival in 
this respect many regimes which go by the name 
of liberal But it is in any case an almost 
unlimited power, and this fact makes it a very 
delicate instrument, which easily outlives its use- 
fulness, and which can easily be abused. For this 
reason, it is important that it should not seek 
permanence/' 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 

That was in May 1930: and In the following 
month he made the celebrated speech to which we 
must now return, in which he outlined the theory 
of democracy which was to supersede the dictator- 
ship when conditions should permit of it. 

"The political liberalism of the nineteenth 
century/' he said, "created the 'citizen* individ- 
ual isolated from the family, the class, the pro- 
fession, the cultural milieu, from the economic 
whole to which he belonged and gave him the 
optional right of taking part in the constitution of 
the Government. It was there that the source of 
national sovereignty was assumed to be. 

"If we regard realities, we find ourselves con- 
fronted here with an abstraction an erroneous or 
inadequate concept and it is in turning towards 
the natural groups necessary to individual life, and 
upon which political life really depends, that the 
point of departure which we seek will be more 
surely found. The first of these is the family, the 
irreducible social unit, the original core of the 
parish, of the township, and therefore of the na- 
tion. Effectively protected in its formation, its 
preservation and development, the family ought 
to exercise, through the voice of its head, the right 
of electing the members of the administrative 
bodies, at least those of the parish, for that right is 
no more than the natural expression of the hearths 



13* THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

and homes, with the common Interests which are 
theirs." 

Article XII of the Constitution (quoted on p. 
70, above) consequently describes the family as 
"a fundamental of political and administrative 
order, by its association In the parish and in the 
municipality, as well as by its representation In 
the local authorities governing these/' And Ar- 
ticle XIX lays down that "the right of electing to 
the Parish Councils (juntas de freguesia) belongs 
exclusively to the families." But by Article XXI, 
"In the political organisation of the State, the 
parish councils shall take part In the election of 
the municipal chambers and provincial councils, 
and In the constitution of the Corporative Cham- 
ber/ 1 Local administration Is, in fact, the first 
interest of those specified in Article CII for repre- 
sentation in the Corporative Chamber, and at the 
present day It has more representatives there than 
any other. The family will thus be seen to be 
fundamentally represented in the Corporative 
Chamber: It has been called "the prototypal cor- 
poration/' 

Continuing to speak of "the natural groups 
necessary to individual life, and upon which po- 
litical life really depends/' Salazar turned to "the 
moral and economic corporations, such as the 
Universities, the scientific academies, the literary, 
artistic, and technical groups, the agricultural, In- 



THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 

dustrial, commercial, colonial and workers' asso- 
ciations"; vocational groups created, as he said, by 
the instinct of civilisation, and which, in the words 
of Quadragesimo Anno, "are considered by many 
to be, if not essential to civil society, at least natu- 
ral to it." These, said Salazar, "should partici- 
pate by vote or by representation in the Chambers, 
which we wish to be truly representative of the 
Nation. Once more we abandon a fiction the 
Party to make of a reality the Association." 
And in Article XX of the Constitution we read: 
"All the component parts of the Nation shall be 
represented in the corporative organisations, 
through their appropriate organs, and it shall be 
their business to participate in the election of the 
municipal chambers and provincial councils, as 
well as in the constitution of the Corporative 
Chamber." 

"To sum up," said Salazar, "we seek to con- 
struct a social and corporative State corresponding 
exactly with the natural structure of society. The 
families, the parishes, the townships, the corpora- 
tions, where all the citizens are to be found with 
their fundamental juridical liberties, are the or- 
ganisms which make up the nation, and as such 
they ought to take a direct part in the constitution 
of the supreme bodies of the State. Here is an 
expression of the representative system that is 
more faithful than any other." Or, as he wrote on 



134 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

another occasion, "In the domain of political 
institutions the corporative organisation is fun- 
damental . . . the more this organisation is 
developed, the more will the State represent more 
faithfully than it does to-day the Nation itself, as 
an organic entity." 15 

So Is the Corporative Chamber a body repre- 
sentative of the Nation. It is not merely a body 
representative of producers' interests: It integrally 
represents the Nation, producers and consumers 
alike. We have stated why we think that It Is 
likely to become the chief legislative body in Por- 
tugal, and we have provided the necessary data. 
The reader must decide for himself whether he 
agrees. 



CHAPTER 



PORTUGAL IS NOT "FASCIST" 



o NOT., I beg o you, compare the Italian 
case with the Portuguese/* said Salazar to 
Antonio Ferro. 

Portugal is not "Fascist/' There is a very great 
deal of confusion about the meaning of that word. 
Owing to intensive and extremely effective propa- 
ganda from the Left, it has come to be generally 
and falsely used to describe any form of national- 
ism which will not tolerate international Com- 
munism, in the same way as it has come to be 
regarded by millions of muddle-headed Britons as 
vaguely synonymous with War. But there is only 
one country in the world to-day that is Fascist, and 
that is Italy. Germany is not Fascist; neither is 
National Spain. The reason, quite simply, is that 
Fascism is something Italian. 

General Franco, when asked in a recent inter- 
view whether he was committed to the ideal of 
the Corporate State, is reported to have replied: 
"That is a general term, and may easily be mis- 
understood. Corporatism in Spain will grant to 

135 



Ig6 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

every citizen the right to participate in the social 
and economic life o the country on the basis o 
his labours. . . . Our corporatism, however, will 
be indigenous, domestic, Spanish. It will be suited 
to the individualism of the Spanish personality. 
It will not be slavishly modelled on foreign pat- 
terns. It should be noted, for example, that the 
system of corporations set up by Dr. Oliveira Sala- 
zar in Portugal is Iberian, not continental. We in 
Spain will fashion our own type of corporation." 
Earlier in the same interview he had said: "Obvi- 
ously, the doctrines of the papal encyclicals furnish 
a sound programme of economic and social recon- 
struction. The application of their principles, 
however, must be considered in relation to the 
genius and traditions of the Spanish people/' x 

So with Salazar: the Estado Novo is not Fascist 
because it is Portuguese. But by saying that Por- 
tugal is not "Fascist" I mean three things more. I 
mean that the Nationalism of Portugal is not 
totalitarian Nationalism, in any meaning of that 
adjective, and that the corporative organisation of 
Portugal is different fundamentally, as well as in 
many unimportant ways, from that of Italy. I 
mean also that it is not true to regard Portugal in 
her external policy as an appendage of that arti- 
ficial central-European bloc which is known as the 
Rome-Berlin axis. 

The political problem of Dr. Salazar has been 



PORTUGAL IS NOT FASCIST 137 

greatly complicated since civil war broke out in 
Spain. No government has better cause than the 
Portuguese to fear the danger of war spreading 
beyond Spain, and no government has more im- 
mediate cause to fear Communism in the Penin- 
sula. This being so, it was impossible for Portugal 
to accept without reservation all the proposals of 
the International Committee for Non-interven- 
tion. Because of this, and since there are certain 
obvious but superficial points of similarity be- 
tween the political system of Portugal and that of 
Italy, whose interests in Spain are the same, she 
has been accused of deserting her centuries-old 
English alliance in favour of Rome and Berlin. 
She has been classed as "a Fascist country. " 

Mr. A. L. Rowse, a distinguished exponent of 
Labour's views, put the common but quite unjust 
judgment on Portugal into one sentence in a letter 
to The Times in August last year (1937) . He 
was maintaining that Europe is divided into two 
opposing and hostile camps, consisting of the Na- 
tions of the Right and the Nations of the Left. 
"In Portugal, even/' he wrote, "it is a dictatorship 
of the Right which has deserted the old under- 
standing with this country for a new one with 
Mussolini and Hitler/' 

But in point of fact, nothing of the kind has 
happened. Portugal is intensely jealous of her 
national integrity, and will repudiate any sugges- 



Ig8 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

tlon of external domination, from Italy or else- 
where, with the same proud scorn with which, in 
1928, she refused to accept the Geneva loan. She 
is also intensely jealous of her now admirably ad- 
ministered colonial Empire; and Germany has not 
troubled to conceal her designs on the prosperous 
West African territory of Angola. If any further 
proof is needed that the judgment of Mr. Rowse 
was mistaken, it was provided at the Brussels Con- 
ference. Portugal has no important interests in 
the Far East, and she was able on that occasion to 
make clear that she is not subservient to the Rome- 
Berlin axis. Again, why has she not joined the 
Anti-Comintern Pact? It is because that Pact is a 
political mutual-assistance pact. Portugal Is vi- 
tally concerned to fight International Commu- 
nism, but she is not concerned in the political 
machinations of Italy, Germany, and Japan. 

On July 4, 1937, a bomb was thrown at Dr. Sala- 
zar as he "entered a Church to hear Mass, by men 
of the kind against which General Franco Is fight- 
Ing in Spain. Two days later he delivered an 
important speech to representatives of the nation's 
defence forces, who had assembled to congratulate 
him on his escape from death. In this speech he 
emphasised that the British alliance must neces- 
sarily always remain the basis of his country's for- 
eign policy. "The most valuable Item of our 
external policy is the age-old alliance with Great 



PORTUGAL IS NOT "FASCIST** 

Britain; much of what we have done and Intend 
to do still aims at tightening that bond. From 
time to time in Great Britain, certain persons, 
surely with no great sense o responsibility, irri- 
tated by our attitude in other matters (i.e., in 
Spanish policy) , have placed their own passions 
or resentment above national and international 
interests, and have invited the British Government 
to reconsider the question of the alliance with 
Portugal. . . . 

"We have special interests of our own in the 
Peninsula, and run risks which other countries do 
not share. We believe that public opinion in cer- 
tain countries, especially in France and Great Brit- 
ain, is ill-informed as to the true nature of the 
Spanish problem, and of the events that have taken 
place in that country. Some people do not believe 
in the Communist peril; we, on the other hand, 
feel it, see it, and fear that Communism, with the 
connivance of other countries, may take root in 
Spain, and so destroy any chance of the Spanish 
people working out their own political salvation 
for there could be no national liberty or independ- 
ent choice in a State largely controlled by several 
Internationals. Hence our uncompromising atti- 
tude from the very start: hence our opposition to 
any form of non-intervention which should preju- 
dice the chances of Spanish Nationalism, which 
stands between Portugal and Iberian Commu- 



THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

nism; hence the odium which we have incurred 
in certain quarters we may add, quite justifiably/* 
Portugal, then, unlike Righteous Russia, has 
never attempted to conceal the fact that she is 
interested in the Spanish issue. Salazar took the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs temporarily into his 
own hands on November 6, 1936, when it became 
apparent that the war in Spain was to be a war of 
years rather than a war of months. His Govern- 
ment has done all within its power to collaborate 
in securing genuine non-intervention: it has scru- 
pulously observed all undertakings it has made, 
and the amount of war material that has crossed 
the Portuguese frontier into Spain is less than neg- 
ligible compared to the amount that poured across 
the Pyrenees all through 1937, unknown to those 
who know Europe only through the British Press. 
In October 1936, repeated accusations made to the 
London Non-Intervention Committee by the So- 
viet representative, M. Maisky, led the British 
Government to conduct an investigation of its 
own, as a result of which it reported to the Com- 
mittee on October 24th that it had been quite 
unable to discover any evidence that Portugal had 
been the channel for the conveyance of any pro- 
visions, money, or amis to Spain. From the very 
beginning, the Soviet has made any real plan for 
non-intervention impossible. But Portugal, who 



PORTUGAL IS NOT "FASCIST" 141 

of all nations can least afford to bind herself to 
neutrality, has honoured her word throughout. 

The Communist Party in Great Britain is at 
present noisy but negligible; and it is difficult for 
the Englishman to realise the extent of subterran- 
ean Communist activity on the Continent, just as 
it is difficult for him to conceive that Freemasonry 
In Spain and Portugal is not the same respectable 
thing that it is in this country. He is inclined to 
utter a cynical "Pshaw" when he hears mention of 
the subversive activity of the Comintern; although 
he has by this time been sufficiently informed of 
the magnitude of the Communist coup in Spain 
which was forestalled by the Nationalist rising. 
The plan involved the creation of a Federation of 
Iberian Soviet Republics, to include not only 
Spain, Catalonia, the Basque Country, and the 
Balearic Islands, but Portugal as well.* The cam- 
paign against Portugal was made more urgent 
when war broke out; six million pesetas were paid 
by an agent of the Caballero Government to 
Portuguese agents, and the work of sabotage pro- 
ceeded without delay. The Portuguese Legation 
in Madrid was sacked to facilitate quiet examina- 
tion of Its archives. 2 Next, in October 1936, revo- 
lutionary "cells" were planted on two Portuguese 
cruisers In a Spanish harbour, and a mutiny was 
engineered when they returned to Lisbon. The 

* See p. 17, above. 



142 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

Portuguese Air Force restored order In half an 
hour. In January 1937, nine bombs burst simul- 
taneously in the Ministerial buildings In Lisbon, 
planted there by six agents of the Okaba a Balkan 
branch of the Comintern, which specialises in such 
work. Little damage was done, and the Uniao 
National redoubled its vigilance. Finally came 
the attempt on the life of Salazar. It was not an 
isolated outrage, but an Incident in a long cam- 
paign. The national solidarity of the Portuguese 
is proof against any serious Communist upheaval, 
but attacks continue. General Franco has suc- 
cessfully driven a Communist Government (in de- 
sign, if not in name) from the Portuguese frontier. 
And it would be well for those in this country who 
denounce him so bitterly to remember that if he 
had not risen, and if International Communism 
had conquered Spain, it would undoubtedly have 
proceeded to the destruction of Portugal; and that, 
since Great Britain is bound by treaty to go to the 
assistance of Portugal should she be attacked, Gen- 
eral Franco has probably saved Britain from armed 
intervention. 

The Anglo-Portuguese alliance, alleged to have 
been abandoned, is in fact being at present 
strengthened by both parties by all means possible. 
The British are alarmed by the possibility of un- 
due Italian influence in Nationalist Spain; if the 
Italians are to have the run of Spanish harbours, 



PORTUGAL IS NOT "FASCIST^ 143 

Great Britain Is determined that the harbours of 
Portugal, which command the Atlantic approaches 
to the Mediterranean, shall continue to be at the 
disposal of the Royal Navy, as they have been for 
three centuries. Moreover, the alternative route 
to India and the East, by way of the Cape, is well 
protected by three groups of Portuguese Islands: 
Madeira, the Azores, and the Cape Verde Isles. It 
is for these reasons that a British naval and mili- 
tary mission spent the whole of 1938 in Portugal. 
Dr. Salazar's speech of July 6, 1937, reaffirming 
that the alliance of Portugal with this country is 
the basis of her foreign policy, was almost unno- 
ticed in England. But as Bilbao, Santander, and 
Gijon successively fell, and the Nationalist mastery 
in Spain became increasingly apparent, the general 
British attitude towards Portugal changed from 
one of rather suspicious indifference to one of em- 
phasised friendliness, the principal consideration, 
as I have said, being the necessity of countering in 
advance a possible advantage to Italy In her bid 
for naval supremacy in the Mediterranean. About 
the middle of September, for instance, The Times,, 
which is supposed to reflect official policy, started 
printing frequent testimony to the friendliness of 
the Portuguese, which, as its Lisbon correspondent 
was able to report, "created an excellent impres- 
sion." On September i4th it devoted nearly two 



144 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

columns to praise of Dr. Salazar and his foreign 
policy. It extended the cordial hand in a leading 
article on the same day, and in another leading 
article on December loth. It devoted much space, 
and half a page of pictures, to the University of 
Coimbra, when that establishment began the cele- 
brations of its four-hundredth anniversary. The 
first intimation of the mission that is to be sent to 
Portugal came on October 25th, and the official 
announcement was published on November goth. 
On January 24th The Times produced another 
leading article, and another column and a half 
from its Lisbon correspondent. In February the 
British Home Fleet paid a ceremonial visit to Lis- 
bon. Later in the month, the naval and military 
mission arrived, and remained in Portugal until 
December. In the summer an Anglo-Portuguese 
Society was founded in London. In November a 
British Institute in Portugal was opened by the 
British Council for Cultural Relations with For- 
eign Countries. When at the end of the year King 
George VI invested President Carmona with the 
insignia of the Grand Cross and Collar of the 
Order of the Bath, the work of re-affirming the 
oldest and among the most valuable of British 
alliances was finally concluded. 



PORTUGAL IS NOT "FASCIST" 145 

II 

Portugal is not "Fascist." 

Whether that word means the defensive tyranny 
of defeated capitalism, or the particular form of 
political and economic organisation to be found 
in modern Italy, still Portugal is not Fascist. It 
should have already been made amply clear that 
Portugal is not Fascist in the former, Marxist, and 
general understanding of that word. We will 
proceed to show that Portugal is not Fascist in the 
second and correct meaning of the term. Ger- 
many is not a Corporate State, still less Japan, 
although she is denounced as Fascist from Labour 
platforms. Italy alone is Fascist, and we are here 
concerned to contrast contemporary Portugal with 
contemporary Italy. 

The obvious similarities are three in number. 
Italy as a Corporate State; so is Portugal. Italy is 
inspired by a strong nationalism; so is Portugal. 
And Italy is governed largely by one man, the head 
of the Government, who is known as a Dictator; 
so is Portugal. But each of these similarities is 
superficial; each of these matters is very differently 
considered in Portugal and in Italy. 

The difference in corporative theory can be ex- 
pressed quite simply: the corporatism of Italy is a 
corporatisme d'etat, while that of Portugal, as we 
have explained, is a corporatisme d* association. 



146 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

Italian Fascism began with the compulsory dissolu- 
tion of all existing forms of Trade Unionism; in 
Portugal there were no effective Trade Unions be- 
fore the coming of Salazar, and, as we have de- 
scribed, the Estado Novo provided the worker for 
the first time with machinery for collective bar- 
gaining, which was not previously legal, and for 
the protection of his rights. We have noted the 
parallel between the Portuguese Statute of Na- 
tional Labour and the Italian Charter of Labour 
of 1927; but there are some very essential differ- 
ences between the two documents. Article III of 
the Italian Charter of Labour runs: "There is com- 
plete freedom of professional or syndical organisa- 
tion. But syndicates legally recognised and subject 
to State control alone have the right of legal repre- 
sentation of the whole category of employers and 
workers for which they are constituted.'* All of 
this can be found in the Portuguese Statute, except 
that key-phrase which I have italicised. Or again, 
in The Corporate State, by Benito Mussolini, we 
find the following: "The first legislative indication 
of the future development of Corporations may be 
found in the Act of April 3, 1926 (No. 563) .... 
Art. 43 specified the character and nature of the 
Corporation, which was defined as an 'organ of 
the State' in the following terms: "The Corpora- 
tion is not endowed with civil personality, but is 
an organ of State Administration. The decree 



PORTUGAL IS NOT FASCIST" 147 

whereby It Is constituted shall specify its organisa- 
tion and regulate the duties of Its central and local 
offices/ " 3 We could not better Illustrate the pre- 
cisely opposite natures of Italian and Portuguese 
corporatism. In Portugal, as we have already made 
clear, the Corporation is to be an autonomous 
body: we have quoted Salazar to this effect (p. 77 
above) . But In Italy, according to Mussolini, the 
Corporation Is to be "an organ of the State/* So 
can the matter be put into two lines. 

To extend the contrast: Portuguese corporatism 
Is integral, while Italian corporatism is exclusively 
economic. Integral corporatism, according to 
Manoilesco, is that which "considers as corpora- 
tions endowed with an autonomous organisation 
and their own rights not only the economic cor- 
porations, but also the social and cultural corpora- 
tions of the nation, such as the Church, the Army, 
the Judiciary, the corporations of national educa- 
tion, of public health, of the sciences and of the 
arts/' 4 The Italian Corporations, to quote the 
Charter of Labour again, "constitute the unitary 
organisation of all the forces of production,, and 
integrally represent their interests" (Art. VI; my 
italics) . But the Portuguese Corporative Cham- 
ber is representative of the whole of the national 
life. It includes eight sections to which there is 
nothing in Italy to correspond: there are represen- 
tatives not only of "the forces of production/' but 



148 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

of the Catholic Church and her missions, of the 
national defence forces, of the Judiciary, of public 
and local Administration, of the Universities and 
Academies of Architecture, Music, and the Fine 
Arts, and even of the Portuguese Olympic Games 
Committee. 

The contrast between Italian and Portuguese 
corporatism, then, is profound, and the similarities 
are superficial. Both are based on the principle 
that the common good is "more divine/' as Aris- 
totle and St. Thomas say, than the individual 
good, and is different in kind from the mere sum 
of individual goods; but in Portugal that principle 
is complemented by the principle that the State is 
the servant of society. 

That essential second axiom largely explains the 
difference between Portuguese and Fascist Nation- 
alisms. The nationalism of Portugal is a patriot- 
ism and pride born of her long centuries of 
history; whereas it is almost true to say that the 
exaggerated nationalisms of Italy and Germany 
can be explained by their lack of history, as na- 
tions. As we know them to-day, they became 
nations less than one century ago; and the etatisme 
of Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany to-day is largely, 
though not wholly, due to their anxiety that unity 
and national pride should appear to the world as 
their chief characteristics, since for centuries the 
peoples that comprise them had been so utterly 



PORTUGAL IS NOT "FASCIST** 149 

disunited. But Portugal is a nation as old as Eu- 
rope, and her present frontiers have been the same 
through eight centuries. Salazar is inspired with 
a sense of responsibility to history, to "our Lusi- 
tanian, Latin, and Christian patrimony"; and the 
Estado Novo is a vindication of the historic Portu- 
gal. That must be seized as a cardinal point if the 
work o Salazar is to be understood. His appeal is 
not an appeal to the vanished glories of the fif- 
teenth century; it is not a political exploitation of 
the saudade. It is an appeal rather to tradition; 
it is a responsibility to the lives and sufferings of 
the past generations which have produced the pres- 
ent. As he sees it, the history of Portugal suffered 
an interruption during the nineteenth century, 
when the country was dominated by alien ideas 
and governed through alien institutions. Portu- 
gal for a period ceased to be truly Portuguese; but 
in 1926 that period ended, and the Portugal of 
history came once more into its own. 

But if Salazar looks back across one hundred 
years, Mussolini looks back across two thousand, 
to the Emperor Augustus, whose bimillenary has 
just been celebrated in Rome with such ceremony. 
Mussolini also makes the appeal to history; but it 
is an appeal to the history of Imperial Rome, not 
to the history of the peasants and people of Italy; 
and it is the peasants and people of Italy of whom 
he is the ruler. 



150 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

In support o that appeal, Italy must have also 
the impregnable navy, the vast army, the foreign 
adventure, the colonial empire, and so forth. The 
supreme necessity is that of proving to the world 
that she is a great nation. For that must her people 
be regimented, must freedom be destroyed, must 
blood be shed. That is the supreme mission of 
the State. 

In Portugal it is not so. The mission of the 
State is to serve, not to regiment. Liberty is 
respected, therefore; and the Constitution lists and 
guarantees the rights and liberties of the citizens. 5 
Subversive activity is not tolerated, but freedom of 
opinion is respected. "Personally," writes Leon 
de Ponclns, "I was astonished at the extreme free- 
dom with which opponents of the regime loudly 
proclaimed their criticisms in the public places. 
All of those who spoke thus of the severity of the 
dictatorship seemed well aware that if they said in 
Russia, in Germany, or in Italy a tenth part of 
what they openly expressed in Portugal, things 
would go very hard for them/* 6 That was before 
the days of the Spanish war. "It was symptomatic 
of Dr. Salazar's regime/' according to The Times, 7 
"that, at least until the Spanish civil war, under- 
graduates might freely criticise the Government 
in the Coimbra cafes without fearing the presence 
of a police spy at the next table/' 

But the Spanish war has necessarily produced a 



PORTUGAL IS NOT "FASCIST^ 151 

state of semi-emergency in Portugal; liberties have 
had to be restricted "for the duration." We have 
spoken of the subterranean assaults that Portugal 
has suffered at the hands of the Comintern; and 
the Estado Nova cannot fairly be judged until the 
danger has passed. Defensive necessity, moreover, 
has compelled various manifestations of Portu- 
guese national solidarity that seem at first sight to 
confirm the impression that Salazar is playing frog 
to Mussolini's bull The eleventh anniversary of 
the Revolution, for instance, was celebrated on 
May 28, 1937, * n a manner reminiscent of similar 
occasions in Rome or Berlin. Fifteen thousand 
men of the Portuguese Legion, followed by five 
thousand boys of the Mocidade Portuguesatht 
Portuguese youth organisation, so ominously like 
the Hitler Youth and the Italian B dittosmarched 
down Lisbon's Avenida da Liberdade and across 
the Terreiro do Paco, the famous Black Horse 
Square, while ten three-engined bombers and fif- 
teen other fighting planes flew past overhead. But 
this sort of thing only began ten years after the 
launching of the new regime, and began, to the 
regret of Salazar, to meet the first serious challenge 
the regime had received a challenge from with- 
out. With hell loose in Spain, and the Comintern 
active; with the excitable Portuguese mind rest- 
less at the sight of war; with the Spaniards fighting 
for Spain and their existence there was no alter- 



152 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

native. War in Spain began in the summer of 
1936. The Mocidade Portuguese membership of 
which is compulsory for all boys between seven 
and fourteen, was founded then. In his interviews 
with Antonio Ferro, which provide the classic 
guide to the mind of Salazar, he had said: "It is 
clear that we neither can nor should follow the 
Italian system of absorbing the child into the State, 
or copy the excessively nationalist and militarist 
organisation of the Ballila" 8 Similarly, Salazar 
had long been opposed to the foundation of the 
Portuguese Legion, a voluntary military organisa- 
tion for the defence of the regime, which had long 
been urged by the more unbalanced among his ad- 
visers. He only permitted it when it became essen- 
tion for the security of the State, and as soon as it 
was apparent that the war in Spain was to be a war 
to the death. Even so, it is by no means true that 
Portugal is living in a condition of permanent 
martial law, as Italy and Germany are practically 
doing. 

"You cannot imagine how difficult it is to wake 
up our sleepy and apathetic race," said Salazar to 
Antonio Ferro. The function of martial music 
and military display can vary; and it is used to 
awaken the torpid Portuguese to urgent realities, 
whereas Mussolini uses it to intoxicate the electric 
Italian. But there are no spotlights on Salazar; 
Mussolini delights in the theatrical, but Salazar 



PORTUGAL IS NOT "FASCIST^ 

abhors It. His distaste for publicity is the despair 
of his officials. He attends two official banquets a 
year; for the rest, he emerges into the limelight as 
little as possible, speaks as seldom as possible, and 
leaves to President Carmona the business of taking 
salutes, Inspecting guards o honour, and so forth. 
The only uniform he ever wears Is a dark suit and 
a bowler hat. 

The fact that Portugal during the last ten years 
has been rearming has again led to the facile com- 
parison of Salazar with Aesop's frog. Of course 
Portugal Is rearming. Even countries so pacific as 
Sweden and Switzerland are being compelled to 
strengthen their defence forces, with all Europe 
apparently treading the primrose path to the ever- 
lasting bonfire. And Portugal, apart from the 
menace from Red Spain, has great colonial pos- 
sessions to defend, and listens with apprehension 
to the continual demands for Empire which come 
from Italy and Germany, those countries with 
whom her Intimate co-operation is none the less 
alleged. 

For three years past, Portugal has been drawing 
upon her fortunately stable finances for rearma- 
ment, purchasing aircraft and modern naval units 
in England, and other equipment elsewhere. Here, 
as In all else, she has to contend with pressure 
from International Communism, which caused the 
failure of a Czecho-Slovak firm to adhere to its con- 



154 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

tract, and the subsequent rupture of diplomatic 
relations, in August 1937. 

In 1935 alone, 1,040,000 was spent by Portugal 
in British naval shipyards. Modernisation was 
clearly long overdue: until 1936, for instance, the 
flagship of the Portuguese Navy was the ancient 
cruiser Vasco da Gama, which had been afloat for 
well over half a century. When Portugal entered 
the Great War, the German paper Simplicissimus 
published a brilliant drawing with the title "The 
Portuguese Navy puts to Sea." That drawing well 
summarised the care shown for national prestige 
by the Liberal-Masonic hegemony that ended in 
1936. 

The Portuguese army, also, has been greatly im- 
proved by Salazar in his capacity as Prime Minister 
since, in his capacity as Minister of Finance, he 
made such improvement financially possible. It 
is now a very different force to that recently de- 
scribed by the late Brigadier-General Crozier in 
his book The Men I Shot. Its peace strength at 
home is 26,070, and in the colonies 10,000: small 
enough figures, in all conscience, but at least 
efficient. On January 4, 1938, an important series 
of decrees was promulgated, for the reform and 
reorganisation of the army. They testify, com- 
ments The Times, "to a courageous attitude by 
the Government in the face of Service conserva- 
tism." They also demonstrate that the Govern- 



PORTUGAL IS NOT "FASCIST^ 155 

ment Is not kept in power by the army, as its 
enemies allege. 

in 

Perhaps really the most important reason why 
Portugal is not Fascist is this: that Salazar is not a 
party politician. He is not, and never has been, 
concerned with political manoeuvres. In Russia 
there is the Communist PARTY. In Germany there 
is the Nazi PARTY. And in Italy there is the Fas- 
cist PARTY. But in Portugal there is no party. 
Salazar is not the leader of a party: he is leader o 
Portugal. The Uniao National is not a party. It 
is not concerned with politics; politics have been 
banished from Portugal. It is the expression of 
national support for the work of Salazar; and the 
work of Salazar is to realise the national good. 

"I laugh hugely/' he once said to an interviewer, 
"when I hear talk of the 'Right' and the 'Left/ In 
fact, I think that those words mean nothing at all. 
For my part, if you tell me that the Right stands 
for social discipline, for authority, for unity of 
direction then I am of the Right. But if you tell 
me that the Left means an attempt to improve the 
conditions of the lives of the people, to admit them 
to the cares of government, to raise their standard 
of comfort and education then gladly am I of the 
Left. But the truth is, in my opinion at least, that 
there are no rights and lefts to-day; there are only 



156 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

plans of government, more or less practicable, that 
are either tried out or not. If they are carried out 
for the greatest good of the country, then a na- 
tional work is done, and all the rights and lefts 
that there may be are therefore put aside/' 9 

''When I speak of a 'National Polity/ " he told 
Antonio Ferro, "I understand that the Nation our 
Nation is a living reality that we wish to pre- 
serve; that the Nation is an organic entity, com- 
posed of individuals differing in their abilities and 
in their occupations, which, dissimilar in them- 
selves, make up a social hierarchy; that there are 
interests of this entity quite distinct from individ- 
ual interests, and even sometimes conflicting with 
the immediate interests of the majority and, much 
more, with those of a group or class; that, for the 
good of the national interest, the natural or social 
groupings of men must be recognisedthe family, 
the society, the Trade Union, the association for 
spiritual purposes, the local authority but that 
groupings of a political kind, organised for the 
acquisition of power and the domination of the 
State, need not necessarily be recognised. These 
things are so self-evident that no party dares to pre- 
tend that it does not propose to bring about such 
a national polity, and all accept the foregoing 
principles except such as concern themselves. 
Nevertheless, experience shows that they do not 
succeed in bringing it about, since in all national 



PORTUGAL IS NOT ^FASCIST*' 157 

crises or In times of general fatigue provoked by 
the party spirit, one hears the cry that the party 
colours should be lowered in favour of a truly 
national Government." 10 

He proceeds to emphasise that no Government 
can govern truly in the national interest unless It 
completely transcends the party spirit, and actively 
opposes any tendency of the party spirit to return. 

It must always be remembered that he is talking 
about Portugal, and that the Estado Nova is Portu- 
guese. "I have not a horror of parties in a general 
way: I have a horror of the party spirit in Portugal. 
England has lived for centuries under a party sys- 
tem, and has managed quite well so far. . . . But 
in Portugal these groups have formed themselves 
round individuals or vested interests or seekers 
after power, simply in their own interests. That is 
the sort of party spirit that must be ended If we 
are to achieve any real work of reconstruction/' n 

"The more profound is our feeling of the or- 
ganic reality of the Nation, the more necessary it 
becomes to thrust aside all factions, parties, and 
groups to which individuals adhere according to 
chance circumstances. There will be no more 
such politics, and two benefits will result: for the 
Nation, the fact that the Government will work 
solely for it, and for the Government, the splendid 
liberty of being able to serve only the nation." 12 

Contrasting the Portuguese with the Italian and 



158 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

other revolts against the party system, he writes: 
"The military origin of the Portuguese dictator- 
ship will always give a special characteristic to our 
revolution. With us, it was not a party, a revolu- 
tionary force, which seized power; it was the army, 
the voice of the nation, which intervened to create 
the conditions necessary to the existence of a Gov- 
ernment that should be both national and opposed 
to the parties. The armed forces do not constitute 
a party, do not represent a party, cannot depend 
on any party." 13 

The Portuguese experience has not consisted in 
the application by some triumphant faction of a 
programme previously prepared. What has hap- 
pened has been that a completely disinterested 
Government has been placed in power by the 
army, and preserved in power by the gratitude of 
the people. The break with nineteenth century 
liberalism has been complete: that which has 
arisen is called the Estado Novo, the New State; 
but it is really very old, as old as Christendom and 
Kings. 

Portugal, then, is not Fascist, for this reason: 
that in Italy, which is Fascist, a party with a pro- 
gramme gained power and applied it. In Portu- 
gal, a man with a number of fundamental 
principles, and those principles little more than 
the bases of Christian morals, was placed in con- 
trol and fostered and developed a truly Portu- 
guese Portugal. 



PORTUGAL IS NOT "FASCIST^ 159 

There Is no etatisme In Portugal: that Is why 
Portugal is not Fascist. In rejecting Liberalism, 
Salazar has preserved liberty. He has preserved 
Portugal from any form of totalitarianism. To 
quote him again: "The State which would sub- 
ordinate all without exception its morality, Its 
law, its politics, its economy to the idea of nation 
or of race as represented by itself would come for- 
ward as an omnipotent being, a beginning and end 
In itself, to which all existences, both individual 
and collective, must be subjected, and would give 
rise to a worse form of absolutism than that to 
which the Liberal regimes succeeded. Such a State 
would be essentially pagan, of its nature incompat- 
ible with the spirit of our Christian civilisa- 
tion. . . . 

"The (Portuguese) Constitution, approved by 
popular plebiscite, rejects as Irreconcilable with Its 
ends all that proceeds, directly or Indirectly, from 
this totalitarian conception. It begins by establish- 
ing the moral law and justice as limits to Its own 
sovereignty; it obliges the State to respect its natu- 
ral obligations towards the individual, the family, 
the corporation, and local government; it assures 
liberty and inviolability of religious beliefs and 
practices; It acknowledges the right of parents to 
educate their own children; it guarantees the 
rights of property, capital, and labour, within the 
social harmony, it recognises the Church, with the 



l6o THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

organisations which are proper to her, and leaves 
her free to carry on her spiritual work. 

"It will one day be recognised that Portugal is 
governed by a unique system, which accords with 
her own historic and geographical situation, quite 
different from all others; and we wish it to be 
clearly understood that we have not put aside the 
errors and wrongs of false Liberalism and false 
democracy merely in order to adopt others which 
may be yet worse; but, on the contrary, to reorga- 
nise and strengthen the country according to the 
principles of authority, order, and national tradi- 
tion, in harmony with those eternal verities which 
are happily the heritage of humanity, the appa- 
nage of Christian civilisation/' 14 

Salazar, then, is fully aware of his European 
responsibility, of Portugal's duty of preserving her 
share of our common heritage of Europe and the 
Faith. And just as the corporative ideal synthe- 
sises all the various elements in the State, and 
disciplines them into one common harmony, so 
does it regard western civilisation as a wider unity, 
comprising different peoples, different cultures, 
and different national traditions. International 
co-operation, and the subordination of immediate 
national interests to the larger interests of Europe, 
are principles implicit in true corporatism. They 
are accepted by Portugal; they are not accepted by 
Fascist Italy. National self-sufficiency is constantly 
emphasised by Mussolini as an essential part of his 



PORTUGAL IS NOT "FASCIST" l6l 

policy. But Salazar has written: * 'There is not a 
single country in the world to-day that can say that 
it is open to the free exchange o goods; neverthe- 
less, ours is among those in which the restrictions 
are least. We regard as a great error that extreme 
economic nationalism which we see arising every- 
where, taking no account o the natural conditions 
o existence of the peoples, and destroying, to the 
prejudice of humanity, the special characters o 
the various national economies. Far from solving 
the problems of the day, the creation of self-suffi- 
cient economic units will serve only to create other 
problems in the future/* 15 

The National economy of Portugal, which disci- 
plines towards the common end all private inter- 
ests, must not be confused with the economic 
nationalism of Italy or of Germany. She regards 
herself and her foreign possessions as forming a 
single whole; the colonies are "provinces d'outre- 
mer/' and her first responsibility is to them. But 
her responsibility to Europe is always acknowl- 
edged. It is acknowledged in Article XXX of the 
Constitution, which says that "the State shall regu- 
late its economic relations with other countries 
according to the principle of appropriate co-opera- 
tion/' equally as by Article IV, according to which 
"it is incumbent upon it to co-operate with other 
States in the preparation and adoption o measures 
designed to promote peace among peoples and the 
progress of mankind/' 



NOTES TO THE CHAPTERS 



NOTES TO CHAPTER I (Pages 9 to 30) 

*de la Tour du Pin: "Aphorismes de politique sociale." 3rd 
editon: Paris, 1930, p. 16. 

s Divini Redemptoris, par. 32. 

a j. M. Keynes: The End of Laissez-Faire. London: 1927, p. 41. 

4 cf. G. M. Godden: Conflict in Spain. "It cannot be too often 
repeated that General Franco Is Republican, and that he has never 
been a Fascist. In the New Spain the state will be corporative, and 
will follow on the lines of the Nuova Estado (sic) of Portugal." 
(p. 100.) 

5 H. A. L. Fisher: A History of Europe (One volume edition) , p. 

59- 

The Times: March 22, 1933. 

7 Mihail Manoilesco: Le Siecle du Gorporatisme. (Felix Alcan: 
Paris, 1936) . Quoted by M. Freppel Cotta in Economic Planning in 
Corporative Portugal: (London: P. & S. King, 1937) , p. 16, note. 

8 In 1935 there were 292 births and 176 deaths in Portugal for 
every ten thousand inhabitants. Both these figures are high; com- 
pare them with England's 147 births and 117 deaths. Between 
1913 and 1935 the birth-rate in Portugal declined by twelve per 
cent; in England during the same period, however, the decline was 
thirty-nine per cent. 

(Figures quoted in The Tablet, October 2, 1937, from the Dos- 
siers de L f Action Populaire.) 

8 Douglas Goldring: Portugal. London, 1933. 

310 A. F. G. Bell: Portugal of the Portuguese. London, 1915. 

11 These Chronicles have been published in an excellent English 
translation, edited by Senhora de Castro e Almeida. (Allen & Un- 
win: 1936.) 

12 The phrase is that of Mr. S. George West, lecturer in Portu- 
guese at London University, from his excellent lecture on "The 
New Corporative State of Portugal," delivered at King's College, 
London, on February 15, 1937, and since reprinted. 

Further details of the financial achievement of Dr. Salazar are 
given later in this book, but those interested are recommended to 
read Professor Oliveira Salazar's Record* by Tornaz Wylie Fer- 

162 



NOTES TO THE CHAPTERS 163 

nandes (Lisbon, 1936: in English) , or La Renaissance financiers et 
Economique du Portugal, by Paul Lavagne, in the Revue des Sci- 
ences Politiques, July-September, 1935. 



NOTES TO CHAPTER II (Pages 31 to 60) 

1 Mr. David Hannay in the Cambridge Modern History: Vol. 
XII, Chapter X. 

2 A. F. G. Bell: op. cit., pp. 185-7. 

8 Sir George Young: Portugal: An Historical Study. (Oxford, 
1917) , p. 274. 

* Paris: Gabriel Beauchesne et Fils: 1936. This book goes into 
an immense amount of circumstantial detail, and among other 
things prints the text of Law No. 1,910 of May 21, 1935, by which 
all secret societies were made illegal in Portugal, and gives details 
of the events leading up to that law. 

5 Young: op. cit., p. 286. 

6 Senhor F. E. da Silva, in an address to the Sotiet d'Economie 
Politique de Belgique: Brussels, December 1934. cf. also Paul 
Lavagne in La Reveu des Sciences Politiques, July-September, 1935, 
on "La Renaissance Financiere et Economique du Portugal.'* "La 
guerre, qui imposa 1'entretien de corps expe"ditionnaires, a la fois en 
France et en Afrique, n'aurait meme pas, a elle seule, compromis 
dangereusement les ressources du pays, si 1'ordre y avait 6te" mis. 
La participation portugaise avait etc" financed par FAngleterre et 
cette dette, porte"e dans les comptes pour une annuite" re"guliere, 
aurait pu e^ventuellement faire 1'objet d'arrangements plus sup- 
portables. Les bons du Tresor (87 millions au 30 juin 1919, au lieu 
de 1,250 en 1928) pouvaient encore etre consilides. 

"Mais les extravagances financieres, inhe'rentes a la periode 
d'hostilit<s, laisserent dans tous les pays une funeste semence d'im- 
preroyance et de de*sordre qui trouva un terrain d'election au 
Portugal. Ce furent alors 1'abandon de tout contr61e, 1'accroisse- 
ment du gaspillage, la predilection pour les solutions paresseuses, 
le fonctionnarisme hypertrophi, llncoordination gn6ralisee, la 
disparition des responsabilitfe; tout cela, favoris6 par 1'agitation 
incessante des partis." 

7 Bell: op. cit., pp. 213-15. 

8 Le*on de Poncins: Le Portugal Renait, p. 47. 

8 Ibid, pp. 47-9; Webster: Secret Societies and Subversive Move- 
ments., p. 283. 

The Times: March 13, 1935. 

^Gonzague de Reynold: Portugal (Paris, Spes, 1936), p. 270. 



164 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

12 Antonio Ferro: Le Portugal et son Chef (Paris, Bernard Gras- 
sct, 1934) , p. 178. 

This book, a French translation of a series of interviews given 
by Salazar which was published in the Portuguese newspaper 
Diario de Noticias in December 1932, gives an admirable picture of 
Salazar and his ideas. Antonio Ferro is now head of the Secretari- 
ado da Propaganda Nacional at Lisbon. 

18 Ibid, p. 104. 

14 H.-Ch. Che"ry in Sept; July 1937. 



NOTES TO CHAPTER III (Pages 61 to 107) 

1 TMs originally appeared in the Constitution as Article XIV. 
The Constitution has been amended in its details on several occa- 
sions: references throughout this book are to it as it was after De- 
cember 21, 1936. It should be noted that the translation is the 
author's own, and not official; nevertheless he thinks and hopes 
that it may be regarded as accurate. 

2 Quadragesima Anno: par. 80. 

*Divini Redemptoris: par. 32. 

* Ferro: op. cit, pp. 133-4. 

5 Pereira dos Santos: Un Etat Corporatif: La Constitution Sociale 
et Politique Portuguese, Paris: Recueil Sirey, 1935, p. 56- This is 
a long and documented study of the Portuguese Constitution, writ- 
ten as a thesis for a Doctorate at Louvain, and must be valuable to 
any who would study the Estado Novo in detail. It is, however, 
rather too minute and exacting in examination, since the Portu- 
guese Estado Novo is admittedly only in an experimental stage at 
present; such a work will be of greater value when some sort of 
finality has been achieved. 

6 Article 41 of the Irish Constitution (1937) begins thus: "The 
State recognises the .Family as the natural primary and fundamental 
unit group of Society, and as a moral institution possessing inalien- 
able and imprescriptible rights, antecedent and superior to all posi- 
tive law." 

And Art. 42: "The State acknowledges that the primary and 
natural educator of the child is the Family." 

7 Salazar: Speech on March 13, 1933- 

8 Salazar: Speech at Braga: May 1936. 

9 Art. VI, i, quoted above; also Art. IV. 

w Fr. Albert Muller, S.J., paper read at the International Union 
of Social Studies: Malines, September 1937. 

u Salazar: Introduction to the French edition of his collected 



NOTES TO THE CHAPTERS 165 

speeches: Une Revolution dans la Paix. Paris: Plammarion, 1936, 
p, xxv. 

13 Quadragesima Anno: par. 95. See the encyclical *'Non abbi- 
amo bisogno" of the following month June 1931 for a further 
discussion of Fascist Italy. 

13 Gonzague de Reynold: op. tit., p. 310. 

14 Salazar: Introduction as cited: pp. xxiii-lv. 

15 Gonzague de Reynold: op. tit., p. 311. 

18 Fr. Muller: La Politique Corporative: Brussels, 1935, pp. 80-1. 

17 Speech of Salazar: March 16, 1933. 

18 Quadragesima Anno: pars. 83 and 85. 

19 Statute of National Labour: Art. VIII. 

20 Ibid: Art. IX. Constitution: Art. XXXIX. 
a FreppeI Gotta: op, tit., p. 153. 

22 cf. Joao Lumbrales in Politique: Paris, May 1934. 

23 La Politique Corporative, p. 88. 

^Statute of National Labour: Arts. L, LI, LII. 

25 Art. II of Decree-Law No. 23,053: September 23, 1933. 

28 Decree-Law No. 24,362: August 15, 1934. 

27 In a foreword to Une Revolution dans la Paix. 

^Salazar: Introduction to the same, p. xxiii. 

^Speech on January 28, 1934. 

30 Joao Lumbrales: op. cit. 

^Freppel Gotta: op. tit., p. 160. 

^Ferro: op. tit., p. 136. 



NOTES TO CHAPTER IV (Pages 108 to 134) 

1 Michael Kenny, S.J., in The Sign (U.S.A.) . May 1937. 

3 op. tit, p. 65. 

8 Mihail Manoilesco: Le Siecle du Corporatisme. Quoted by 
M. Freppel Cotta in Economic Planning in Corporative Portugal. 

* Article by G. W. P. McLachlan in a special supplement pub- 
lished by The Times on the occasion of the centenary of the P & 
O. Steamship Co. September 7, 1937. 

5 Introduction as cited, p. xxxL The following quotation from a 
speech of General Franco also has interesting bearing on the pres- 
ent chapter: "We do not. believe in suffrage. The Spanish national 
will was never freely expressed through the ballot box. Before, 
first the political bosses and afterwards the tyrannical syndicates 
forced the Spanish people to vote according to their whim, giving 
them orders. The popular will in the new State will express itself 
through technical organisations and corporations, which, having 
deep roots in the country, will represent the genuine desires and 



i66 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

ideals of the people. . . . Our Government will be stronga Gov- 
ernment for the people. Those who think we are going to support 
the privileges of capitalism are entirely wrong. We shall support 
the middle and humble classes." (Reported in the Observer: Oc- 
tober 4, 1936.) 

8 Salazar: Speech at Braga, May 1936. 

7 A. F. G. Bell, op. cit., p. 194. 

8 The present writer expressed this opinion in an article in the 
Dublin Review, for October 1937, which he sent, inviting criticism, 
to Senhor J. L. da Silva Bias, of the Secretariado da Propaganda 
Nacional at Lisbon. Senhor Silva Bias replied at length, disagree- 
ing with several things, but without commenting on this particular 
opinion. 

8 Salazar: Speech on November 23, 1932. 

10 He assumed the Ministry of War on May 11, 1936, and the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs on November 6 of the same year, both 
par interim that is, to meet the emergency occasioned by the 
Spanish War. 

31 op. cit., p. 25. 

35 Salazar: in a broadcast; December g, 1934. 

18 Ferro: op. cit., p. 317. He prints the speech in full, but erro- 
neously dates it 1928. The mistake has been copied by Gonzague 
de Reynold. 

14 The Times: August 28, 1931. Quoted by Le*on de Poncins, 
and translated back from his French by me. I have not had the 
opportunity to look up the original: de Poncins quotes a long cut- 
ting, beginning "II est de notorie'te' courante que cette agitation a 
e*te" fomente'e par les politiciens portugais exiles a Paris, et particu- 
lierement par quelques pre"ce"dents chefs du Grand Orient du Por- 
tugal." op. cit., p. 75. 

15 Salazar: Introduction as cited, p. xli. 



NOTES TO CHAPTER V (Pages 135 to 161) 

1 Interview reported in The Catholic Herald: Dec. 3, 1937. 

a The details of these events I have only on the authority of 
Je Suis Partout and Le Jour; but the general facts are common 
knowledge. 

8 The Corporate State, by Benito Mussolini: Florence, Vallecchi 
Editore. 1936. pp. 96-7. 

* Quoted by Freppel Cotta, p. 23. 

6 Constitution: Article VIII. We will list its more important 
provisions: 



NOTES TO THE CHAPTERS 167 

"The following constitute the rights and individual guarantees 
of Portuguese citizens: 

1. The right to life and personal involiability. 

2. The right to good name and reputation. 

3. Liberty and inviolability of religious beliefs and practice. 

4. The free expression of thought in any form. 

5. Freedom of education. 

6. Inviolability of domicile and secrecy of correspondence, 
subject to the terms of the law. 

8. No one shall be deprived of personal liberty or arrested 
without a charge being brought. 

11. No one shall suffer punishment by perpetual imprison- 
ment, or the penalty of death, except, as regards the latter, 
during a state of belligerency with a foreign power, in 
which case the sentence must be carried out on the scene 
of the war. 

12. There shall be no confiscation of goods . . from a delin- 
quent. 

14. Freedom of meeting and association. 

15. The right of property. . . . 

16. There shall be no payment of taxes which have not been 
decreed in accordance with the Constitution. 

18. The right of making representations or petition, claim or 
complaint, to Government departments or to any authori- 
ties, in defence of personal rights or general interests. 

19. The right of resistance to any order which may infringe 
individual guarantees, unless they have been legally sus- 
pended, and of repelling by force private aggression when 
recourse to public authority is impossible/' 

*Leon de Poncins: op. cit., p. 183. 

7 The Times: December 10, 1937. In the matter of freedom to 
criticise the regime, it is interesting to note the methods adopted 
by Salazar, through the Secretariado da Propaganda Nacional, to 
inculcate his ideas into the nation. "The Secretariado classifies all 
periodicals according to their attitude towards the regime. There 
are those which are favourable, those which are sympathetic, those 
which are neutral, and those which are hostile. The Secretariado 
sends articles to the editors of them all. They have no obligation 
to accept them; i they refuse them, no steps of any kind will be 
taken against them. And here are some statistics: The Secre- 
tariado began its work in December 1933. Up to December 1934, 
it had sent 1,310 articles to 67 periodicals; from December 1934, to 
December 1935 2,027 articles to 75 periodicals. The number of 
neutral, and even opposition journals which inserted articles sup- 



168 THE PORTUGAL OF SALAZAR 

plied by the Secretariado increased considerably, and from the time 
that this work was begun the whole tone of the Press began to be 
more moderate. In December 1933, out of 251 political periodicals, 
40 were for the Government, 61 sympathetic, 69 neutral, and 81 
in opposition. By December 1934, out of 247 periodicals, 62 
were for the Government, 86 were sympathetic, 43 were neutral, 
and only 56 in opposition. So do methods of persuasion generally 
succeed better than methods of constraint." (Gonzague de Reyn- 
old: op. cit., p. 307.) The only fact that dismays one is that there 
should be 251 political periodicals in a country of only seven mil- 
lion inhabitants! 